Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56908-5
AI-based approach to dissect the variability
of mouse stem cell-derived embryo models
Paolo Caldarelli
1,5, Luca Deininger
2,3,5, Shi Zhao1, Pallavi Panda
1,
Changhuei Yang
1, Ralf Mikut
2
& Magdalena Zernicka-Goetz
1,4
Recent advances in stem cell-derived embryo models have transformed
developmental biology, offering insights into embryogenesis without the
constraints of natural embryos. However, variability in their development
challenges research standardization. To address this, we use deep learning to
enhance the reproducibility of selecting stem cell-derived embryo models.
Through live imaging and AI-based models, we classify 900 mouse post-
implantation stem cell-derived embryo-like structures (ETiX-embryos) into
normal and abnormal categories. Our best-performing model achieves 88%
accuracy at 90 h post-cell seeding and 65% accuracy at the initial cell-seeding
stage, forecasting developmental trajectories. Our analysis reveals that nor-
mally developed ETiX-embryos have higher cell counts and distinct morpho-
logical features such as larger size and more compact shape. Perturbation
experiments increasing initial cell numbers further supported this ﬁnding by
improving normal development outcomes. This study demonstrates deep
learning’s utility in improving embryo model selection and reveals critical
features of ETiX-embryo self-organization, advancing consistency in this
evolving ﬁeld.
In recent years, the ﬁeld of developmental biology has undergone a
transformative shift with the introduction of stem cell-derived embryo
models1. These innovative models emulate various stages of embryo-
nic development, offering new research avenues that were previously
constrained by ethical and practical limitations associated with using
actual embryos. Among these, some are designed to mimic pre-
implantation development2,3, while others capture post-implantation
stages
of
mouse
(e.g.,
ETS4,
ETXs5
and
ETiXs6)
and
human
embryogenesis7–9. The ability of these post-implantation models to
progress to advanced developmental stages makes them invaluable
tools for translational research, particularly in unraveling develop-
mental disorders and advancing regenerative medicine10.
Despite their considerable promise, these models face signiﬁcant
challenges, primarily stemming from a limited understanding of the
initial stages of cell and tissue self-organization. The initial phases of
development in these models are crucial, as they set the foundation for
all subsequent growth and differentiation11. However, the lack of
detailed characterization of these phases results in variability in
development outcomes. Typically, within just a few days of develop-
ment, there are observable differences in growth and morphology
among embryo models. This variability complicates efforts to stan-
dardize experiments and limits the models’ applicability for more high-
throughput screens.
The ETiX-embryo model stands as one of the most advanced
model systems for simulating post-implantation development in
mice12. This model is constructed by aggregating embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) with trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) derived from extra-
embryonic ectoderm (ExE) precursors. Additionally, ESCs that are
Received: 30 August 2024
Accepted: 5 February 2025
Check for updates
1Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA. 2Group for Automated Image and Data Analysis,
Institute for Automation and Applied Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Eggenstein‑Leopoldshafen, Germany. 3Division of Pediatric Neurology
and Metabolic Medicine, Department I, Center for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Medical Faculty Heidelberg, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany. 4Mammalian Embryo and Stem Cell Group, Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK. 5These authors contributed equally: Paolo Caldarelli, Luca Deininger.
e-mail: ralf.mikut@kit.edu; magdaz@caltech.edu
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:1772 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
transiently induced to express the visceral endoderm master regulator
GATA4, are incorporated to enhance the model’s ﬁdelity to natural
development processes. The ETiX model has demonstrated potential
in reaching early organogenesis stages6,13,14. However, by the 4th-day
post-seeding, a culling process is necessary to eliminate structures that
fail to meet the developmental criteria akin to the natural progression
of embryogenesis at a comparable stage. Such selection is common in
organoid and stem cell-derived embryo models research, where typi-
cally only the most promising samples are carried forward for further
study. The selection process is inherently subjective and reliant on the
individual researcher’s judgment, leading to variability in outcomes
across different laboratories.
To address these challenges and improve the reliability of stem
cell-derived embryo models, it is essential to adopt innovative analy-
tical approaches. One such promising solution is the integration of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) techniques for image analysis, which has
been proven a valuable tool in a variety of complex scenarios15. Parti-
cularly, a branch of AI known as deep learning revolves around training
neural networks on large datasets. In the context of image classiﬁca-
tion, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and vision transformers
(ViTs) play a pivotal role. CNNs leverage hierarchical layers that per-
form convolution operations, allowing them to extract features from
raw data, particularly suited for tasks like image classiﬁcation16–18.
Notable CNN architectures include AlexNet16, MobileNet17, and
ResNet18, each contributing unique innovations like pioneering deep
network structures (AlexNet), mobile device optimization (Mobile-
Net), and residual connections for deep network training (ResNet). In
contrast, ViTs divide images into ﬁxed-size patches, transforming each
into a sequence of tokens processed by a transformer encoder for
feature extraction. One recent ViT, in particular, designed for video
classiﬁcation, is the Multiscale Vision Transformer (MViT)18, which
combines hierarchical features with ViTs.
The proven success of deep learning in image and video classiﬁ-
cation has driven signiﬁcant breakthroughs across various ﬁelds,
including biomedicine, by enabling precise disease diagnosis, drug
discovery,
and
personalized
treatment
strategies.
In
organoid
research, deep-learning models facilitate the monitoring, tracking, and
analysis of organoid morphological features over time19,20. In embryo
research, models like EmbryoNet21, a ResNet-based model, identiﬁed
molecular defects in zebraﬁsh embryos. These successes highlight the
potential for deep learning to accurately classify and analyze stem cell-
derived embryo models such as ETiX-embryos.
Here, we developed a model optimized for the cultivation and
imaging of hundreds of stem cell-derived embryo models at a time and
applied deep-learning-based classiﬁcation across various stages of
ETiX-embryo development to provide insights into embryo features
predictive of future successful development and discuss how our
ﬁndings can improve embryo cultivation efﬁciency.
Results
Detailed dynamics and expert classiﬁcation of ETiX-embryos via
live-imaging
We employed a custom-developed live-imaging platform to observe
the development of ETiX-embryos within microwells constructed from
agarose, focusing on the initial 90 h (Supplementary Fig. 1). This
platform, accommodating ~320 stem cell-derived embryo-like struc-
tures per session, utilized confocal microscopy to capture multifocal
images of each ETiX-embryo (Fig. 1A, B and Supplementary Movie 1).
To enable detailed visualization, the cells were ﬂuorescently labeled:
ESCs were tagged with membrane-targeted RFP6, ESC-iGata4 with
membrane-targeted GFP12, and TSCs with a membrane far-red dye
(CellMask), enabling tracking of each cell type within the developing
ETiX-embryo.
Employing this methodology, we created a dataset of 900 ETiX-
embryos, which were subsequently annotated based on images of the
last 25 h of the time-lapse, focusing on speciﬁc characteristics namely
lineage segregation, the presence of the pro-amniotic cavity—a ﬂuid-
ﬁlled space forming soon after implantation through lumenogenesis of
the epiblast22—and an overall cylindrical shape (Fig. 1C). All of these
characteristics had to be met for an ETiX-embryo to be classiﬁed as
normal. Speciﬁcally, ETiX-embryos were classiﬁed by an expert
embryologist as normal if they displayed a cylindrical shape with dis-
tinct cellular compartments derived from TSCs and ESCs, enveloped
by a monolayer of ESC-iGata4 cells that resemble the visceral endo-
derm. The formation of a well-deﬁned pro-amniotic cavity was also a
crucial indicator. These features are classical hallmarks of a properly
developed mouse embryo at the early post-implantation stage, just
before the onset of anterior visceral endoderm migration to specify
the anterior-posterior axis and gastrulation. Of the ETiX-embryos
analyzed in three independent experiments, only 23% (206) met the
criteria for normal development throughout the observation period
(Fig. 1D, F and Supplementary Movie 2), while the remaining 77% (694)
were classiﬁed as abnormal, showing structural and developmental
abnormalities (Fig. 1D, G and Supplementary Movie 3). Additionally, by
carrying out the time-lapse studies, we noticed that most ETiX-
embryos were not synchronized in their development, and therefore,
we annotated an end time point for each ETiX-embryo at a similar
developmental stage, ranging between 65 and 90 h post-cell-seeding
(Fig. 1E and Supplementary Fig. 2A, B). We refer to this as the syn-
chronized dataset, which was subsequently used to train our deep-
learning model, StembryoNet.
These ﬁndings demonstrate the capability of our imaging plat-
form to provide insights into ETiX-embryo development. While
conﬁrming the known variability in ETiX-embryogenesis, our time-
lapse imaging enables tracking of each embryo’s developmental
history, allowing us to investigate the underlying causes of this
variability.
StembryoNet: an AI model for stem cell-derived embryo classi-
ﬁcation at advanced developmental stages
For deep-learning-based ETiX-embryo classiﬁcation at 90 h post-cell-
seeding, we introduce StembryoNet, a deep-learning model built on a
ResNet18 architecture (Fig. 2A). StembryoNet is speciﬁcally designed
to be trained on synchronized data while also enabling predictions on
unsynchronized data. It retains the ﬁve sequential convolutional layers
and global average pooling of ResNet18 but replaces the original 1000-
neuron fully connected layer with a single-neuron layer for binary ETiX
classiﬁcation. Additionally, we substitute the softmax function with a
sigmoidal activation function to calculate class probabilities. A key
feature of StembryoNet is its ability to predict outcomes from
unsynchronized data. It achieves this by processing consecutive time
points from the last 25 h of the same ETiX-embryo, generating indivi-
dual outputs for each time point. These outputs are then con-
catenated, and the thresholded maximum probability across the time
points is used to determine the ﬁnal classiﬁcation (Fig. 2A). To train
StembryoNet on the phenotype of normal ETiX-embryos, we used the
synchronized dataset, which aligns ETiX-embryo-speciﬁc time points
at similar developmental stages (Supplementary Fig. 2B, D). As syn-
chronization is not feasible for abnormal embryos, we sampled their
synchronized time points using a normal distribution with the same
mean and standard deviation as those of normal ETiX-embryos. To
highlight the advantage of StembryoNet over state-of-the-art deep
learning models, we compared its performance to a single ResNet18
trained on ETiX-embryo images captured at 90 h (ResNet90h) and a
Multiscale Vision Transformer (MViT) trained on videos of ETiX-
embryo development spanning from 65 to 90 h (MViT65–90 h). To
obtain an unbiased estimate of the models’ performances, we used
ﬁve-times repeated 5-fold cross-validation (Supplementary Fig. 2C).
Detailed information on model training and evaluation is provided in
the Methods section.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56908-5
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:1772 
2
Fig. 1 | Long-term live imaging and expert annotation of mouse post-
implantation stem cell-derived embryo models (ETiX). A Schematic illustrating
the formation and structural organization of ETiX-embryos from 0 h to 90 h.
B Representative time points of live imaging movies displaying around 320 ETiX-
embryos at 0, 45, and 90 h after seeding in the Agarwell (n = 3, N = 900). C Dataset
annotation of 900 ETiX-embryos by an expert embryologist based on 4D time-lapse
imaging data. D Bar chart displaying the mean percentage of ETiX-embryos iden-
tiﬁed as normal or abnormal, with error bars representing variability across
datasets (n = 3, 95% CI). E Cumulative histogram of expert-selected time points of
normal ETiX-embryos. F Sequential ﬂuorescence and bright ﬁeld images show-
casing a representative normal ETiX-embryo development at key time points:
seeding (0 h), aggregation (17 h), sorting (38 h), elongation (60 h), and cavitation
(90 h). G Comparative ﬂuorescence and bright ﬁeld images of a representative
ETiX-embryo exhibiting abnormal development at corresponding stages to (F).
ESCs (red), ESC-iGata4 (green), and TSCs (blue). Scale bars: 1000 µm for (C) and
100 µm for (F, G). Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56908-5
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:1772 
3
While a baseline random classiﬁer achieves an accuracyof 50% (F1-
Score = 31%), StembryoNet, ResNet90h, and MViT65-90h all exceeded
this baseline (Fig. 2B). Notably, StembryoNet achieved a mean accu-
racy of 88% (F1 = 77%), outperforming ResNet90h (80% accuracy,
F1 = 67%) and MViT65-90h (81% accuracy, F1 = 68%). The confusion
matrix for StembryoNet indicates a recall of 83% for normal ETiX-
embryos at a precision of 71% (Fig. 2C). In comparison, ResNet90h
yielded more false positives, resulting in a recall of 87% and a precision
of 55% for normal ETiX-embryos (Fig. 2C and Supplementary
Fig.
3D,
E).
StembryoNet
consistently
outperformed
not
only
ResNet90h and MViT65-90h but also other advanced deep learning
models, demonstrating signiﬁcant superiority across comparisons
(Supplementary Fig. 3C). All models are trained on RGB images con-
sisting of three ﬂuorescence channels, as adding the brightﬁeld
channel did not enhance performance (Supplementary Fig. 3A).
Testing StembryoNet on synchronized data (pre-selected time
points) did not yield better performance, demonstrating that Stem-
bryoNet makes a human in the loop expendable (Supplementary
Fig. 3B, E, F). To assess whether StembryoNet’s training on synchro-
nized data accounts for its superior performance compared to
ResNet90h, we tested it on ETiX-embryos at 90 h, achieving 79% accu-
racy (StembryoNet90 h, Supplementary Fig. 3B). This suggests that
training on synchronized data alone does not account for the perfor-
mance difference; instead, the advantage lies in StembryoNet’s ability
to fuse model predictions on unsynchronized data.
To evaluate StembryoNet’s performance in terms of both accu-
racy and speed, we compared it to three embryologists. The results
show that, when using two of the three embryologists as the ground
truth, StembryoNet slightly outperforms the least accurate embryol-
ogist (Supplementary Fig. 3G, H). For the third embryologist, Stem-
bryoNet’s performance is slightly lower than that of the least accurate
embryologist (Supplementary Fig. 3I). In terms of speed, StembryoNet
is 18 times faster than the embryologists (Supplementary Fig. 3J).
Overall, these ﬁndings suggest that StembryoNet achieves accuracy
comparable to that of human experts but with a substantial speed
advantage, highlighting its practical utility for high-throughput
applications.
To contextualize StembryoNet’s predictions biologically, we used
Grad-CAM heatmaps to visualize the model focus areasonboth normal
and abnormal ETiX-embryos (Fig. 2D, E). For normal ETiX-embryos, the
model predominantly focused on the pro-amniotic cavity and the
regions where the visceral endoderm-like (ESC-iGata4-derived tissue)
encircles the epiblast-like and extraembryonic ectoderm-like (ESCs
and TSCs-derived tissues), indicating proper lineage allocation during
early post-implantation development (Fig. 2D). Conversely, for
abnormal ETiX-embryos, the model’s attention varied, focusing on
disparate image parts such as ESC-tissue, ESC-iGata4-tissue, or a mix
thereof, aligning with indicators of abnormal development such as lack
of lumenogenesis, improper compartment formation, or incorrect
lineages positioning (Fig. 2E).
Fully supervised methods like StembryoNet rely on labor-
intensive
human
annotations,
which
makes
self-supervised,
annotation-free deep learning approaches an appealing alternative.
DINO22, a recent self-supervised deep learning method, trains vision
transformers to learn meaningful visual representations without
labeled data. Although DINO performed inferiorly to StembryoNet, it
was able to cluster normal and abnormal ETiX-embryos to some
extent, showcasing the potential of annotation-free approaches for the
future (Supplementary Fig. 4A–C).
In conclusion, StembryoNet signiﬁcantly enhances our ability to
classify ETiX-embryos at advanced developmental stages, achieving
superior accuracy and precision compared to state-of-the-art deep
learning models. By closely aligning with embryologist perceptions
and providing biological insights, StembryoNet represents a robust
tool for the analysis of ETiX-embryo development.
Early identiﬁcation of successful ETiX-embryos via deep
learning
Deep-learning-based classiﬁcation of normal and abnormal ETiX-
embryos at 90 h post-cell-seeding can enhance the reproducibility of
ETiX-embryo selection across laboratories. However, to advance this
approach and delve deeper into the self-organization mechanism of
normal ETiX-embryogenesis, we aimed to (1) predict ETiX-embryo
development outcomes at earlier stages, and (2) identify the features
most predictive of successful development. Since our goal was to
forecast whether an ETiX-embryo would develop normally by 90 h, we
used the embryologist’s annotations at that time point as target labels
(Fig. 3A). To assess model accuracy and pinpoint key classiﬁcation
features over time, we trained models at 5-h intervals from 0 to 90 h,
generating 19 distinct model sets in total. StembryoNet was not
applied for this task, as it is speciﬁcally designed for classiﬁcation at
later developmental stages where ETiX-embryo synchronization—
annotating the time point of similar development—is feasible.
We used two types of models, a ResNet18 and a Support Vector
Machine (SVM), applied to both brightﬁeld and ﬂuorescence images:
ResNetBF, ResNetFluor, SVMBF, and SVMFluor (Fig. 3B). While we trained
the ResNet models directly on the images, SVM models were trained
on simple, pre-extracted image features of ETiX-embryos. Compared
to the deep-learning-based ResNet18, SVM models offer greater
explainability as their manually deﬁned features can be analyzed for
importance. The performance gap between ResNet18 and SVM pro-
vides insights into the advantages of deep-learning features in
comparison to simple features. We employed ﬁve-times repeated
5-fold cross-validation to ensure unbiased estimates of model
performance.
At the cell-seeding stage (t0), both SVMFluor and ResNetFluor sig-
niﬁcantly outperformed a baseline random classiﬁer (Fig. 3C).
ResNetFluor achieved an accuracy of 65% (F1 = 43%), while SVMFluor
performed comparably by achieving an accuracy of 64% (F1 = 42%).
SVMFluor feature weights indicated that the red (ESCs) and green (ESCs-
iGata4) channels were most predictive (Fig. 3D). In contrast, SVMBF
performed signiﬁcantly worse than random and ResNetBF showed no
improvement over random (Fig. 3C), highlighting the critical role of
ﬂuorescence information—i.e., the ﬂuorescent labeling of ESC, ESC-
iGata4, and TSC cells—in early-stage predictions.
Inherently, the channel-wise ﬂuorescence sum (Fig. 3B) is an
estimate of the initial cell number and emerged as a distinguishing
feature of ETiX-embryos with normal and abnormal future develop-
ment. The protocol aims for each ETiX-embryo to contain, on average,
ﬁve ESCs, ﬁve ESCs-iGata4, and sixteen TSCs at the initial cell-seeding
stage. However, achieving these exact cell numbers during seeding is
challenging due to the stochastic nature of cell distribution ineach well
intrinsic to the experimental protocol. This variability could explain
the differences in cell counts observed between normal and abnormal
ETiX-embryos. Indeed, at the time of seeding (t0), an SVM model
trained on the initial number of ESC, ESC-iGata4, and TSC cells
(SVMcellcount) performed comparably to ResNetFluor (Supplementary
Fig. 5A), indicating that the initial number of cells serves as a predictor
for successful development. Further analysis showed that abnormal
embryos typically had signiﬁcantly fewer ESC cells (normal: 6.7 ± 2.9,
abnormal: 4.5 ± 2.5, mean ± SD) and ESC-iGata4 cells (normal: 6.0 ± 2.7,
abnormal: 4.1 ± 2.3, mean ± SD) on average (Supplementary Fig. 5B). In
line with this ﬁnding, additional datasets were generated where the
initial cell numbers for all three cell types were doubled (Data2X,
n = 306) or tripled (Data3X, n = 276). This approach was taken to
explore whether increasing the overall cell count could mitigate the
variability during seeding and ensure that each ETiX-embryo receives
the necessary complement of cells for normal development. By uni-
formly increasing the numbers of all three cell types, we hypothesized
that the chances of each embryo receiving sufﬁcient cell numbers
would improve, thereby increasing the proportion of embryos that
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56908-5
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:1772 
4
develop normally. The results conﬁrmed this hypothesis, showing a
higher proportion of normal ETiX-embryos as the initial cell counts
increased, with Data1X, Data2X, and Data3X exhibiting normal ETiX-
embryos proportions of 23%, 32%, and 60%, respectively (Supple-
mentary Fig. 5C and Supplementary Movie 4). This suggests that
increasing the initial number of cells across all lineages may enhance
developmental outcomes by ensuring that each ETiX-embryo receives
the minimum necessary amount of each cell type. Additionally, deep-
learning-based brightﬁeld embryo segmentation showed accelerated
ETiX-embryo growth for Data2X and Data3X, allowing them to
reach similar developmental stages earlier than those in Data1x (Sup-
plementary Fig. 5E). This was further supported by a negative corre-
lation between the synchronized time points and the number of ESC
cells
(r = −0.33,
Supplementary
Fig.
5F)
and
ESC-iGata4
cells
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56908-5
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:1772 
5
(r = −0.27, Supplementary Fig. 5G) in Data1X, underscoring the need for
synchronization.
As development progressed, classiﬁcation accuracy improved
compared to the cell-seeding stage (Fig. 3E). ResNetFluor consistently
outperformed SVMBF, SVMFluor, and ResNetBF, particularly during later
stages (i.e., 60 to 90 h, Fig. 3E). Over time, ﬂuorescence sum values
decreased in importance while ETiX-embryo shape features gained
relevance (Fig. 3F). In particular, ETiX-embryos with normal develop-
ment followed a clear morphological trajectory (Supplementary
Fig. 6B–E), displaying a higher perimeter and a lower PerimeterSurfa-
ceRatio, indicative of a more compact shape, as opposed to the more
fragmented appearance of abnormal ETiX-embryos likely due to tissue
mispositioning (Supplementary Fig. 6A and Supplementary Movie 5).
Based on the Slingshot method23, we calculated the trajectory by
connecting clusters of ETiX-embryos from distinct time points from 0
to 90 h in 5-h intervals and ordering them based on morphological
similarity, using nine ETiX-embryo shape features extracted from
brightﬁeld ETiX-embryo segmentations, beginning from the initial
time point of 0 h. The analysis also captured radial symmetry breaking
around 65 h, where normal ETiX-embryos, initially spherical with radial
symmetry, began to elongate, while abnormal ones maintained similar
sphericity (Supplementary Fig. 6A and Supplementary Movie 5).
In summary, deep-learning approaches can predict ETiX-embryo
success from the cell-seeding stage, with ﬂuorescence data and initial
cell numbers as key predictors. Increasing initial cell counts improves
the proportion of normal embryos. As development progresses, pre-
diction accuracy increases, and morphological features gain predictive
importance.
Analyzing individual ETiX-embryo development identiﬁes dis-
tinct developmental progressions
We next aimed to analyze individual ETiX-embryos to assess their
developmental progression and evaluate their likelihood of becoming
normal ETiX-embryos over the course of development. We identiﬁed
four distinct patterns of ETiXs development: continuously normal,
abnormal that transition to normal, continuously abnormal, and initi-
ally normal-looking embryos that manifested abnormalities as devel-
opment progressed (Fig. 4A–D and Supplementary Movie 6). For
instance, one ETiX-embryo initially showed abnormal development
and apparent lineage allocation failure but eventually readjusted after
35 h post-cell-seeding, exhibiting a 20-h delay compared to a normal
embryo (Fig. 4B, E and Supplementary Movie 6). Another ETiX-
embryo, which transitioned from normal to abnormal development,
initially resembled
a continuously normal ETiX-embryo before
deviating at around 35 h post-cell-seeding, likely due to a failure in
tissue sorting (Fig. 4D, E and Supplementary Movie 6).
This classiﬁcation revealed a spectrum of developmental out-
comes, ranked from most to least frequent: continuously abnormal,
initially normal then becoming abnormal, continuously normal, and
initially abnormal then turning normal (Fig. 4F). Applying this cate-
gorization to Data2X and Data3X revealed higher proportions of normal
EtiX-embryos, further supporting our previous ﬁndings (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 5D). This categorization deepens our understanding of ETiX-
embryogenesis dynamics and underscores the importance of tracking
and analyzing individual ETiX-embryo trajectories over time, rather
than assuming successful development is established early on and
maintained throughout the observation period. Indeed, our ﬁndings
conﬁrm the non-deterministic and highly self-organizing nature of the
system, demonstrating that ETiX-embryos can readjust in response to
ﬂuctuations.
Discussion
Our study marks an advancement in the use of deep learning to classify
and dissect the experimental variability of stem cell-derived embryo
models, representing the ﬁrst study of this kind in the ﬁeld. We
introduced StembryoNet, a deep-learning model speciﬁcally designed
to classify ETiX-embryos at advanced developmentalstages (90 h post-
seeding), achieving a remarkable accuracy of 88% (F1-Score = 77%).
This performance signiﬁcantly surpasses that of other state-of-the-art
models, such as ResNet18 and MViT (p < 0.0001), conﬁrming the
robustness and reliability of StembryoNet in distinguishing between
normal and abnormal embryonic forms. We found that the simpler 2D
ResNet performs on par with the more complex video classiﬁcation
model MViT. We speculate that MViT might require larger datasets to
effectively learn which speciﬁc time points are relevant for classifying
an ETiX-embryo as normal or abnormal. Given the moderate size of our
dataset, the added complexity of MViT did not translate into better
performance, suggesting it may be more suited to larger datasets
where its advanced temporal resolution could be fully leveraged.
Currently, StembryoNet is limited to classiﬁcation at advanced stages,
as embryo synchronization—where an embryologist annotates the
time point of similar development—is only feasible at that stage. Syn-
chronization at earlier time points may enable StembryoNet to per-
form early classiﬁcation in the future.
At the cell-seeding stage, our best-performing deep learning
model achieved a classiﬁcation accuracyof 65% (F1 = 43%), signiﬁcantly
outperforming a random classiﬁer (p < 0.0001). The critical role of
ﬂuorescence data at this stage indicates that early developmental
predictions rely heavily on initial cell count. By doubling and tripling
the number of ESC, ESC-iGata4, and TSC cells, we increased the ratio of
normal ETiX-embryos, underscoring the importance of precise cell
seeding techniques. However, with larger datasets and enhanced
imaging techniques, such as more frequent imaging intervals and
higher spatial resolution, we may uncover subtle developmental cues
in brightﬁeld images at the cell-seeding stage that correlate with suc-
cessful outcomes.
As ETiX embryogenesis progresses, raw ﬂuorescence data
become less informative, and morphological characteristics gain pre-
dictive importance. Normal ETiX-embryos follow a distinct morpho-
logical trajectory, characterized by overall larger sizes, more compact
shapes in early stages (i.e., from 15 to 60 h), and less spherical shapes
post-radial symmetry-breaking (i.e., from 65 h onwards). During this
period, ResNetFluor outperforms ResNetBF. We hypothesize that
ResNetFluor can detect the formation of properly sorted tissue com-
partments during this period, while ResNetBF is limited to overall ETiX-
embryo shape.
Fig. 2 | AI-based ETiX-embryo classiﬁcation at advanced stages ofdevelopment.
A Consecutive images from the ﬁnal 25 h (65–90 h post-seeding) of each embryo
development are input into the StembryoNet. StembryoNet comprises ﬁve con-
volutional layers, followed by a global average pooling (GAP) layer, fully connected
(FC) layer, and sigmoidal activation function (S). The model predicts the probability
of the normal class at each time point. These probabilities are concatenated, and
the maximum probability is thresholded by a parameter θ to determine the class.
B Performance comparison of different classiﬁers that are trained on single-time
points (ResNet90h) and multiple-time points: MViT65–90 h and StembryoNet, over
ﬁve times repeated 5-fold cross validation (CV, n = 25). MViT65–90 h vs. ResNet90h:
t(44) = 0.7, p = 0.48, d = 0.2, 95% CI [−0.01, 0.02], StembryoNet vs. ResNet90 h:
t(41) = 12.5, p = 1.2 × 10−15, d = 3.5, 95% CI [0.07, 0.09], StembryoNet vs. MViT65–90 h:
t(34) = 9.0, p = 1.4 × 10−10, d = 2.6, 95% CI [0.06, 0.09], StembryoNet vs. Random:
t(81) = 76.0, p = 3.6 × 10−77, d = 11.4, 95% CI [0.37, 0.39]. C Confusion matrices of
random classiﬁer, ResNet90 h, and StembryoNet averaged across ﬁve times repe-
ated 5-fold CV. Grad-CAM attention maps highlight signiﬁcant areas contributing to
the classiﬁcation decision of StembryoNet for normal (D) and abnormal (E)
embryos. Box plots: center line, median; box limits, ﬁrst and third quartile; whis-
kers, smallest/largest value no further than 1.5*IQR from the corresponding hinge.
****P < 0.0001, ns not signiﬁcant, two-sided Welch’s t-test. Scale bars: 100 µm.
Source data are provided as Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56908-5
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:1772 
6
Previous work focused on manually selected ETiX-embryos
around 4–8 days after seeding6,14 for further molecular and cellular
characterization, leaving the early stage of self-organization relatively
unexplored. Our AI models, trained at distinct time points from 0 to
90 h, enable the selection of embryos at earlier stages when human
selection is not feasible. For example, our model trained on data at
60 h, achieving a classiﬁcation accuracy of 76%, can select ETiX-
embryos at the time of radial symmetry breaking for further analysis of
this important developmental milestone. Furthermore, despite the
predictive power of the cell count at seeding for normal development,
ETiX-embryos with adequate initial cell setups can still fail at later
stages and vice versa. Our deep learning model successfully identiﬁed
such anomalies (Fig. 4). Future studies could utilize single-cell RNA
sequencing to explore the mechanisms underlying these develop-
mental deviations, which are central to the system’s highly self-
organizing properties. Building on this concept, our deep-learning-
based automated selection of well-developed ETiX-embryos could be
integrated into microscope software, utilizing photoactivable dyes to
select normal ETiX-embryos at any stage for further characterization.
In summary, this study not only enhances our ability to reliably
classify and predict ETiX-embryo development using deep learning
but also deepens our understanding of the developmental dynamics
Fig. 3 | AI-based prediction of future normal ETiX-embryo development.
A Diagram illustrating the approach to predicting future developmental outcomes
of ETiX-embryos and identifying key classiﬁcation features over time. Embryologist
annotations from 65 to 90 h served as target labels. Models were trained at 5-h
intervals across the 0–90-h timeframe, using 5-fold cross-validation repeated 5
times (n = 25) for each interval. B ResNet and Support Vector Machine (SVM)
models were trained on various types of images and features for explainable clas-
siﬁcation. ResNet models included ResNetBF and ResNetFluor, trained on brightﬁeld
and ﬂuorescence images, respectively. SVM models were based on inferred ETiX-
embryo characteristics, namely ﬂuorescent intensity for SVMFluor and shape fea-
tures extracted from brightﬁeld ETiX-embryo segmentations for SVMBF.
C Classiﬁcation performance of ResNetBF, ResNetFluor, SVMBF, and SVMFluor at the
time of seeding (t0) across ﬁve times repeated 5-fold cross-validation. SVMFluor vs.
Random: t(104) = 23.1, p = 1.1 × 10−42, d = 3.9, 95% CI [0.13, 0.15], ResNetFluor vs.
Random: t(27) = 10.6, p = 3.1 × 10−11, d = 3.4, 95% CI [0.12, 0.18], SVMBF vs. Random:
t(112) = −27.1, p = 5.1 × 10−51, d = −4.5, 95% CI [−0.17, −0.14], ResNetBF vs. Random:
t(25) = −0.4, p = 0.72, d = −0.2, 95% CI [−0.08, 0.05], SVMFluor vs. ResNetFluor:
t(30) = −0.7, p = 0.46, d = −0.2, 95% CI [−0.04, 0.02]. D Absolute feature weights of
different channels of SVMFluor model at the time of seeding (t0) E Classiﬁcation
performance of all models along complete ETiX-embryos observation time, from 0
to 90 h. F Absolute SVM feature weights of SVMBF + Fluor model throughout obser-
vation time. Feature importances of brightﬁeld features were averaged. E, F Data
are presented as mean values with error bar CI 95%. Box plots:center line, median;
box limits, ﬁrst and third quartile; whiskers, smallest/largest. value no further than
1.5*IQR from the corresponding hinge. ****P < 0.0001, ns not signiﬁcant, two-sided
Welch’s t-test. Source data are provided as Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56908-5
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:1772 
7
involved. These insights pave the way for a reliable selection of ETiX-
embryos for further research throughout the entire observation per-
iod, contributing to the emerging ﬁeld of stem cell-derived models’
embryology. Finally, the methodologies and ﬁndings presented can be
extended to all stem cell-derived embryo models, both in mouse and
humans, broadening the impact of our work and opening new avenues
for research and clinical innovations.
Methods
Cell culture and transgenic lines
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) were maintained on plates coated with
0.1% gelatin. The culture medium used was N2B27, which is a 50:50
mixture of Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium/F12 (11320033) and
Neurobasal-A media (10888022), supplemented with 0.5% (v/v) N2
(17502048), 1% (v/v) B27 (17504044), 100 µM β-mercaptoethanol
Fig. 4 | Time course AI prediction allows the identiﬁcation of distinct ETiX-
embryo developmental trajectories. A, B ResNet model predictions of the
probability of being classiﬁed as normal for two selected normal ETiX-embryos
plotted over the entire observation period. For this application, ResNet was trained
on unsynchronized data on distinct time points along the complete observation
time, from 0 to 90 h in 5-h intervals, using ﬁve repeated 5-fold cross-validation runs.
(C, D) same as (A, B) but for two selected abnormal ETiX-embryos. E ETiX-embryos
from (B, D) are shown at −20 h and +20 h relative to the model prediction switch, as
well as at the moment of the switch. For (A), we show the same time point as in (B),
and for (C), the same as in (D). F The proportion of embryos in different categories
based on ResNet-predicted probabilities throughout the observation period. Scale
bar: 100 µm. A–D Data are presented as mean values with error bar CI 95%. Source
data are provided as Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56908-5
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:1772 
8
(31350-010), 1% (v/v) penicillin-streptomycin (15140122), and 1% (v/v)
GlutaMAX (35050079). To promote an undifferentiated state, the
medium was enriched with 1 μM of PD0325901 (72182), 3 μM
CHIR99021 (72052), and 10 ng/ml of leukemia inhibitory factor
(78056.1). The cells were cultured at 37 °C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere
containing 5% CO2 and passaged bi-daily. Weekly PCR tests were
conducted to conﬁrm the absence of Mycoplasma contamination. The
ESC lines used included CAG-GFP/tetO-mCherry/tetO-Gata4 and mtmg
ESCs, as established by refs. 6,12.
Trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) were cultured on a layer of mouse
embryonic ﬁbroblasts (MEFs) inactivated with mitomycin C. The
medium used was RPMI 1640 (11875093) supplemented with 20% fetal
bovine serum, 1% (v/v) penicillin-streptomycin (15140122), and 1% (v/v)
GlutaMAX (35050079) and 1 mM sodium pyruvate (11360070). Addi-
tionally, the growth factors FGF4 at 25 ng/ml and heparin at 1 μg/ml
were included to support cell growth and maintenance. Cells were
incubated under the same conditions as ESCs and similarly passaged
every other day. Wild-type TS cells were stained with Far Red Cell Mask
(C37608) for 20 min at 1:1000 before the start of the experiment.
Live imaging of ETiX
The live imaging platform was prepared using a 24-well glass-bottom
plate. Each well was ﬁrst lined with a 1.5% solution of hot agarose.
Subsequently, a 3D-printed plunger with hydrophobic treatment and
designed with indentations at the end was used to cast 1200 micro-
wells into the solidifying agarose, creating the structure necessary for
cell accommodation (we named this platform AgarWell, in assonance
with the commercially available AggreWell).
ETiX-embryos were generated following the procedure described
previously24.
In
summary,
a
cell
suspension
containing
6000
embryonic stem cells (ESCs), 6000 ESCs Gata4-induced embryonic
stem cells (ESC-iGata4), and 19,200 trophoblast stem (TSCs) cells was
prepared. The cells were resuspended in FC medium, consisting of
DMEM (11995-065) with 12.5% FBS, 2 mM GlutaMax (11995-065),
0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (31350-010), 0.1 mM nonessential amino
acids (11140-050), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (11360-070), 1% penicillin-
streptomycin (15140-122), along with 7.5 nM ROCK inhibitor (72304).
This cell mixture was then carefully added to the previously prepared
microwells in the imaging platform.
On the day following cell seeding (Day 1), 1 ml of the medium was
removed from each well and replaced with a fresh FC medium devoid
of ROCK inhibitor. This medium exchange was repeated twice to
ensure the removal of the inhibitor. On Day 2, the medium was again
replaced with fresh FC medium. On Day 3, the medium in each well was
substituted with IVC1 medium, which consists of advanced DMEM/F12
(21331-020) supplemented with 20% (vol/vol) FBS, 2 mM GlutaMax, 1%
(vol/vol) penicillin-streptomycin, 1× ITS-X (51500-056), 8 nM β-estra-
diol, 200 ng/ml progesterone, and 25 mM N-acetyl-L-cysteine.
Live imaging was conducted using a Zeiss LSM980 microscope
equipped with a 10× objective lens. The imaging was performed at a
stable temperature of 37 °C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere containing 5%
CO2, optimized for embryonic development observation. ETiXs were
imaged every 35 min by collecting stacks of 4 μm z-planes. Different
time series were concatenated using Fiji.
ETiXs annotation and staging at advanced stages of
development
Each ETiX time-lapse underwent a detailed examination by an expert
embryologist, who reviewed the last 25 h of the series of images along
with every Z-plane and various imaging channels. ETiXs that exhibited a
cylindrical shape and contained two distinct compartments—one from
Trophoblast Stem Cells (TSCs) and the other from Embryonic Stem Cells
(ESCs), all enveloped by a monolayer resembling the visceral endoderm
composed of ESC-iGata4 cells—were classiﬁed as normal ETiX-embryos.
Structures that failed to meet these criteria were deemed abnormal.
Given the variability in developmental rates among ETiXs, a speciﬁc and
consistent endpoint was established for all observations in the syn-
chronized dataset, ensuring uniformity in data analysis.
Data preparation
To derive one image ﬁle per ETiX-embryo, ETiX-embryos were manu-
ally segmented at the last time point. ETiX-embryos that grew beyond
the imaging border were excluded. Subsequently, the center point of
each segmented ETiX-embryo was used to extract individual ETiX-
embryo images of size 153 × 40 × 288 × 288 × 4 (T × Z × X × Y × C). As in
few cases, the ETiX-embryos were growing in the imaging frame of
neighboring ETiX-embryos, for each ETiX-embryo any neighboring
ETiX-embryo was masked. Therefore, parts of the image belonging to
neighboring ETiX-embryos were replaced with values 120 (brightﬁeld)
and 0 (ﬂuorescence). In total, we ended up with 900 ETiX-embryos. To
correct for varying brightness of the 25 (5 × 5) mosaic tiles in the
brightﬁeld channel, patches of the same z-plane were normalized by
the mean intensity of all patches in this z-plane.
The dataset comprises 4 channels and 40 z-planes. However,
deep-learning models for image classiﬁcation are mainly designed to
take 3-channel images as input. Therefore, we explored different data
inputs most feasible for deep learning training:
• Brightﬁeld in-focus images. These are obtained by selecting the
z-plane where the brightﬁeld images are most sharply focused.
The in-focus brightﬁeld plane was selected based on the z plane
with the maximum Laplacian variance as commonly done for
automatic focus detection25.
• Fluorescence in-focus images. These images are derived from the
z-plane where the brightﬁeld image is in focus, selected based on
the brightﬁeld z-plane with the maximum Laplacian variance. We
used the selected z-plane from the brightﬁeld in-focus image,
since we noticed that the relevant structures in the ﬂuorescence
images are likely showing at the same z plane where the
brightﬁeld image is in-focus.
• Fluorescence z-sum projection images. The idea is to combine all
the slices in the z-stack by summing the pixel intensities along the
z-axis.
• Four-channel image of brightﬁeld and ﬂuorescence in-focus
image combined.
The results demonstrate that ﬂuorescence information signiﬁcantly
surpasses brightﬁeld information in performance, with ﬂuorescence in-
focus images showing a superior outcome compared to ﬂuorescence
z-sum projection images (Supplementary Fig. 3A). Combining the
brightﬁeld and ﬂuorescence information did not lead to an improved
performance (Supplementary Fig. 3A). After all considerations, we
therefore used ﬂuorescence in-focus images for model training.
AI-based ETiX-embryo classiﬁcation at advanced stages of
development
StembryoNet is a deep-learning-based architecture (Fig. 2A). Stem-
bryoNet leverages a ResNet1818 backbone, pre-trained on ImageNet,
incorporating ﬁve consecutive convolutional layers, global average
pooling, a fully connected layer, and a sigmoid activation function. We
selected ResNet for its rapid and reliable convergence in image
classiﬁcation21. Additionally, ResNet demonstrated the smallest stan-
dard deviation among various deep learning architectures, indicating
greater stability and robustness (Supplementary Fig. 3C). StembryoNet
was trained on what we refer to as synchronized data. For synchro-
nized data, an expert embryologist annotated for each embryo the
time point of similar development (Supplementary Fig. 2A, B). The
StembryoNet backbone was trained on single-time points of embryos
at the synchronized time point (Supplementary Fig. 2A, B) for 200
epochs with batch size 16 using optimizer Adam (learning rate = 0.001,
beta1 = 0.9, beta2 = 0.999, weight decay = 0.0001) and a binary cross
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56908-5
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:1772 
9
entropy loss weighted by inverse class frequencies. For abnormal
embryos, synchronization was not feasible, so we sampled their syn-
chronized time points using a normal distribution with the same mean
and standard deviation as those of normal embryos. We used the
Python package PyTorch Lightning (version 2.0.4) for model training.
StembryoNet inference is based on passing consecutive embryo
images of the last 25 h through the model. Then, the model-predicted
probability for class normal of each time point is concatenated. Finally,
the maximum probability is thresholded by θ to derive the prediction.
θ is the threshold resulting in the highest F1-Score on the unsynchro-
nized validation set (Supplementary Fig. 2D) and ensures balancing the
trade-off between precision and recall of predicted normal embryos.
For comparison to StembryoNet, we trained several models using
the same training procedure as for the StembryoNet backbone. These
included
ResNet18,
MobileNet17,
ResNeXt26,
GoogleNet27,
and
DenseNet28, all trained on images at 90 h. For the Multiscale Vision
Transformer (MViT)29, we used the architecture MViTbase, pretrained
on Kinetics-400, with frame length 16 and sample rate 4. We trained
this model for 20 epochs with batch size 1, Adam (beta1 = 0.9,
beta2 = 0.999, weight decay = 0.0001). To ﬁnd an optimal initial
learning rate, we used the PyTorch automatic learning rate ﬁnder prior
to each MViT training. All together, we trained MViT65–90 h which is
trained on videos spanning 65–90 h. To ensure optimal use of the pre-
trained weights, 16 images were equally sampled from 65 to 90 h for
model training and testing. For MViT training, we used PyTorch
Lightning and PyTorchVideo (version 0.1.5).
All models were trained with a binary cross entropy loss weighted
by inverse class frequencies. On-the-ﬂy image augmentations com-
prised random rotation (0–360°) and color jittering (using PyTorch’s
ColorJitter), which involved adjusting the saturation (factor = 0.1) and
contrast (factor = 0.1). The images were normalized according to
ImageNet default normalization. Model training and evaluation com-
prised ﬁve-times repeated 5-fold cross-validation, stratiﬁed by ETiX-
embryo class (Supplementary Fig. 2C). For each split, 75% of the
training set is reserved for model training, and 25% is reserved for
model validation. The validation set has two purposes. First, it is used
to select the best model according to the lowest validation loss. Sec-
ond, it is used to determine the best threshold θ for late classiﬁcation
using StembryoNet (Supplementary Fig. 2D). θ is the threshold
resulting in the highest F1-Score on the validation set. Two-sided
Welch’s t-tests were used to compare model performances, ensuring
the normality assumption was met. For instance, StembryoNet’s
accuracy distribution across ﬁve times repeated 5-fold cross-validation
yielded a Shapiro-Wilk p-value of 0.56, indicating normality.
To generate attention heatmaps, we used Gradient-weighted
Class Activation Mapping (GradCAM)30. We generated the heatmaps
for StembryoNet for selected samples at the time point with the
highest probability of the embryo being normal. Our implementation
used the last feature extraction layer as the model target layer and
backpropagated the ETiX-embryo ground truth label.
For additional validation, we compared StembryoNet’s accuracy
and efﬁciency against three embryologists (A1, A2, and A3). Stem-
bryoNet was trained using each embryologist’s annotations individu-
ally. A1–A3 were included in this multi-annotator comparison, A1’s
annotations were used in the analysis presented in the main text. To
benchmark annotation speed, we measured the time A2 and A3
required to annotate the entire dataset of 900 ETiX-embryos and
compared this to the time taken by StembryoNet to predict labels for
the same dataset across ﬁve repeated 5-fold cross-validation runs,
using an NVIDIA A100-40 GPU.
Random classiﬁer
We simulated a random classiﬁer by drawing a value from a uniform
distribution between −5 and 5, which was then transformed using a
sigmoidalactivation function to derive predicted probabilities for each
embryo in the respective test set. This random classiﬁer was evaluated
with twenty-times repeated 5-fold cross-validation to benchmark
against our models.
Model evaluation metric
To assess the model performance, we used Accuracy and F1-Score (F1).
Accuracy is calculated as the number of correct predictions divided by
the total number of predictions:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN × 100
ð1Þ
with TP = true positives, TN = true negatives, FP = false positives,
and FN = false negatives. The F1 is the harmonic mean of precision and
recall, providing a single score that balances both aspects:
F1 = 2 × precision × recall
precision + recall × 100
ð2Þ
precision =
TP
TP + FP
ð3Þ
recall =
TP
TP + FN
ð4Þ
A perfect classiﬁcation achieves an Accuracy and F1 of 100%.
AI-based prediction of future normal ETiX-embryo development
For AI-based early clas