Review Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-020-00829-9
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 2Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA. 3Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 4Department of Biosciences, 
Rice University, Houston, TX, USA. 5Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA. 6Laboratory of Stem Cell Bioengineering, Institute of 
Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences and School of Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. 7Institute of Chemical 
Sciences and Engineering, School of Basic Science, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. ✉e-mail: matthias.lutolf@epfl.ch; 
aryeh.warmflash@rice.edu; jpfu@umich.edu
T
he development of a multicellular organism from a single 
fertilized egg is a brilliant triumph of evolution that has fas-
cinated generations of scientists (Box 1). Understanding our 
own development is of particular fundamental and practical inter-
est; however, it poses a unique set of technical and ethical challenges. 
Our current knowledge of embryonic development is derived from 
a number of animal species, chosen because they are convenient to 
study and amenable to experimental manipulation or genetic analy-
sis1. These studies have revealed developmental principles (Box 2), 
and signalling and transcriptional networks that underlie cell fate 
patterning and tissue morphogenesis. In particular, most of our 
knowledge of mammalian development derives from the mouse 
model. However, it is becoming evident that there are morphologi-
cal and genetic differences between mice and humans that make 
cross-species comparisons problematic2.
Knowledge of human embryogenesis, which is critical for 
assisted reproductive technologies and prevention of pregnancy 
loss, birth defects and teratogenesis (Box 3), should ideally be 
learned from studying the human embryo per se; however, such 
studies have been challenging due to limited access to and bioethical 
constraints on human embryo specimens. Excess pre-implantation 
human embryos generated in in vitro fertilization (IVF) clinics are 
available for research3,4; however, once a human embryo implants 
into the uterus, subsequent development is hidden from direct 
observation. Recent progress in prolonged in vitro culture of IVF 
human embryos has opened the door for genetic and molecu-
lar studies of human embryos directly5–7. However, international 
guidelines prohibit in vitro culture of human embryos beyond 14 
days post-fertilization (embryonic day 14, E14.0) or reaching the 
onset of primitive streak (PS) development (‘the 14-day rule’)8,9, 
which marks the outset of gastrulation. The bioethical regulation of 
human embryo culture has limited studies of IVF human embryos 
for understanding post-implantation human development. There is 
notable progress in studying non-human primate (NHP) monkey 
embryos10–12, whose developments are similar to humans. However, 
NHP monkey models remain costly, are difficult to modify geneti-
cally, and have their own ethical challenges.
Recent advances in mammalian embryology, stem cell biol-
ogy, organoid technology, and bioengineering have contributed 
to a considerable interest in the development of multicellular 
systems based on emergent self-organization and tissue pattern-
ing. Importantly, different models of the mammalian conceptus 
have been developed using mouse and human stem cells13–30. This 
emerging field aims to use stem cell cultures to create organized 
embryo-like structures (or embryoids), whose development and 
architecture bear remarkable similarities to their in vivo coun-
terparts. Embryoids are distinct from organoids, as organoids 
are organized multicellular structures that mimic the develop-
ment, regeneration and homeostasis of a single tissue or organ. 
In contrast, embryoids aim to model integrated development of 
the entire conceptus or a considerable portion thereof. In gen-
eral, embryoids have a more reproducible cellular organization 
and architecture than organoids, as bioengineering approaches 
are commonly deployed to guide their development and culture 
time is limited to a few days. In addition, the stem cells used in 
embryoids have been well established and their cultures are usu-
ally robust. This Review discusses the developmental principles 
manifested in the development of embryoids and their appli-
cations for advancing human embryology (particularly at the 
post-implantation stages) and reproductive and regenerative 
medicine. Bioengineering tools used for controlling multicellular 
interactions and self-organization critical for embryoid develop-
ment are highlighted. We conclude with a discussion of impor-
tant next steps to leverage advanced bioengineering controls of 
multicellular interactions to promote the continuous, progressive 
development of this exciting nascent field.
Stem-cell-based embryo models for fundamental 
research and translation
Jianping Fu   1,2,3 ✉, Aryeh Warmflash   4,5 ✉ and Matthias P. Lutolf   6,7 ✉
Despite its importance, understanding the early phases of human development has been limited by availability of human sam-
ples. The recent emergence of stem-cell-derived embryo models, a new field aiming to use stem cells to construct in vitro 
models to recapitulate snapshots of the development of the mammalian conceptus, opens up exciting opportunities to promote 
fundamental understanding of human development and advance reproductive and regenerative medicine. This Review provides 
a summary of the current knowledge of early mammalian development, using mouse and human conceptuses as models, and 
emphasizes their similarities and critical differences. We then highlight existing embryo models that mimic different aspects 
of mouse and human development. We further discuss bioengineering tools used for controlling multicellular interactions and 
self-organization critical for the development of these models. We conclude with a discussion of the important next steps and 
exciting future opportunities of stem-cell-derived embryo models for fundamental discovery and translation.
Nature Materials | VOL 20 | February 2021 | 132–144 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
132
Review Article
NaTuRe MaTeRials
Mammalian development as a reference framework
The development of embryoids, like that of embryos, involves the 
emergence of organized multicellular structures, through coor-
dinated cellular processes including pattern formation, morpho-
genesis, cell differentiation and growth. Here we first discuss the 
principles of early mouse and human development before turning 
to how these are manifested in embryoids.
During early development, both mouse and human embryos 
develop from a zygote and proceed through recognizable stages of 
morula, blastula, gastrula, neurula and organogenesis (Fig. 1, Box 
1, Box 4). The overall programme of pre-implantation development 
from a zygote to a blastocyst is conserved between mice and 
Box 2 | Classic developmental concepts and principles
Developmental potency. Developmental potency describes the 
ability of a cell in the embryo to differentiate into other cell types. 
There is a continuum of developmental potency following pro-
gressive development of the embryo, from totipotency, pluripo-
tency, multipotency, oligopotency and finally unipotency.
Pattern formation. Pattern formation is the process by which 
initially equivalent cells in a developing tissue acquire identities 
that lead to a well-ordered spatial pattern of cell activities. Pattern 
formation can involve positional information or cell sorting (see 
below).
Positional information. The concept of positional information 
proposes that cells in a developing tissue acquire positional 
values as in a coordinate system, which they interpret by 
developing in particular ways to give rise to spatial patterns. 
Positional information often involves diffusion of morphogens, 
leading to signalling gradients and differential gene expression 
in a morphogen concentration-dependent manner. A key feature 
of positional information being the basis for pattern formation is 
that there is no pre-pattern in the developing tissue.
Cell sorting. Pattern formation in a developing tissue can initiate 
from the specification of different cell types in the tissue in a 
salt-and-pepper fashion, which is followed by sorting of different 
cell types into distinct domains from where different tissues are 
formed. Cell sorting involves a morphogenetic process during 
which individual cells exchange neighbours, increasing the 
number of homotypic contacts and decreasing the number of 
heterotypic contacts.
Symmetry breaking. Symmetry breaking is the process by 
which an initially homogeneous system acquires an asymmetry 
along an axis. While external cues can induce or assist symmetry 
breaking, asymmetries can emerge spontaneously without such 
input, guided by self-organization (see below).
Self-organization. Self-organization, as a non-equilibrium 
process, can be defined as the formation of complex patterned 
structures from units of less complexity by collective, nonlinear 
interactions, without referring to an external blueprint or 
template. These local internal interactions typically form 
feedback loops, thereby conferring robustness to the system. 
Other common features found in self-organizing systems are 
nonlinearity, symmetry breaking, and the emergence of patterns 
through amplifications of stochastic fluctuations.
Embryonic induction. Embryonic induction is an interaction 
between one (inducing) tissue and another (responding) tissue, 
as a result of which the responding tissue undergoes a change in 
its direction of differentiation.
Signalling centre. A localized region of the embryo that exerts 
a special influence on surrounding cells, usually by means of 
secreted signalling molecules, and thus instructs how those cells 
develop.
Organizer. A signalling centre that directs the development of 
the whole embryo or of part of the embryo.
Community effect. Community effect describes cell–cell 
communication among a group of nearby cells in a developing 
tissue, which is necessary for them to maintain coordinated 
behaviours.
Morphogenetic 
regulation. 
Tissue-scale 
morphogenetic 
changes, including changes in cell shape, number, position and 
force, can work in concert with classic developmental signalling 
events mediated by diffusible signals to regulate gene expression 
and cell fate specification.
Box 1 | Glossary
Conceptus. The products of conception at all stages of develop-
ment from zygote to birth. These include the embryo proper, the 
fetus, the placenta and all extraembryonic membranes. The term 
‘embryo proper’ refers to those parts of the conceptus that will 
form the new body and excludes extraembryonic tissues. Often, 
the terms ‘embryo’ and ‘conceptus’ are used interchangeably.
Pre-implantation development. The first few days of 
development, from fertilization to implantation, during which 
the conceptus travels down the oviduct toward the uterus. It 
encompasses the first 7–9 days after fertilization in humans.
Morula. The very early stage in a conceptus when cleavage has 
resulted in a solid ball of cells.
Implantation. The process of attachment and invasion of the 
conceptus to the uterine tissues that occurs around day 7–9 
after fertilization in humans. Implantation establishes the fetal–
maternal interface leading to later placental development.
Blastula and blastocyst. The stage of the conceptus prior to 
implantation is termed blastula. At this stage, the conceptus is 
called a blastocyst.
Peri-implantation development. The development of the 
conceptus in the uterine tissues prior to gastrulation.
Gastrula and gastrulation. Gastrulation describes the process 
by which the three definitive germ layers of the embryonic 
compartment of the conceptus are formed. Gastrulation begins 
around day 14 in humans. The gastrulation stage conceptus is 
termed gastrula.
Primitive streak. The embryonic structure that breaks radial 
symmetry by establishing the anterior–posterior axis and 
establishes bilateral symmetry (alignment of equivalent 
structures on both sides of the anterior–posterior axis), the site 
of gastrulation, and the formation of the germ layers. In the 
human embryo, the primitive streak appears around day 14 after 
fertilization.
Neurula and neurulation. Neurulation describes the process 
by which the neural tube is formed from the ectodermal neural 
plate. The neural tube will give rise to the brain and spinal cord. 
The neurulation stage conceptus is termed neurula.
Organogenesis. The development of specific organs in the 
embryo such as the brain and heart. Organogenesis starts soon 
after gastrulation. In humans, organogenesis commences during 
the fourth week after fertilization.
Embryonic and fetal stages. The embryonic stage begins with 
the division of the zygote and encompasses the development of 
the body plan and formation of the organs. This is followed by 
the fetal stage, during which growth and maturation of tissues 
and organs occurs. In humans, the fetal stage begins during the 
ninth week after fertilization and continues to birth.
Nature Materials | VOL 20 | February 2021 | 132–144 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
133
Review Article
NaTuRe MaTeRials
humans, leading to the formation of the blastocyst, containing an 
outer trophectoderm (TE) layer surrounding a cavity (blastocoel) 
and an inner cell mass (ICM) on one side of the cavity31,32 (Fig. 1, 
Box 4). As the blastocyst develops, the ICM becomes further segre-
gated into two cell populations: the pluripotent epiblast (EPI) and 
primitive endoderm (PE; or hypoblast in human)31,32.
The timing of blastocyst implantation differs between mice and 
humans (E5.0 in mouse and E7.0 in human). Furthermore, morpho-
genesis and lineage developments during early post-implantation 
mouse and human development show distinct features2,33 (Fig. 1, 
Box 4). Mouse development from E5.0–E6.5 leads to the formation 
of a cup-shaped EPI juxtaposed with TE-derived extraembryonic 
ectoderm (ExE), enclosing the pro-amniotic cavity. Concurrently, 
the PE forms the visceral endoderm (VE) that envelops both 
EPI and ExE. In contrast, soon after human blastocyst implanta-
tion, while the EPI undergoes epithelization and lumenogenesis 
to form the pro-amniotic cavity5–7, EPI cells closer to invading TE 
cells become specified into the amniotic ectoderm (AM)34, with 
remaining pluripotent EPI cells forming the embryonic disc. Thus, 
in pre-gastrulation human embryo, the pro-amniotic cavity is sur-
rounded by a continuous epithelium with AM cells on one side and 
EPI cells on the other.
Studies of mouse gastrulation support the importance of extra-
embryonic tissues35,36 (Fig. 1, Box 4). In particular, regional pattern-
ing of VE in pre-gastrulation mouse embryo leads to a gradient of 
WNT and NODAL signalling and the establishment of the anterior–
posterior (A–P) axis of the embryo37,38. Importantly, developmental 
signals involving WNT, NODAL and BMP at the proximal, poste-
rior end of the EPI instruct EPI cells to form the PS by E6.5 and 
ingress through the PS to acquire mesoderm and endoderm fates39–
41. Human gastrulation initiates around E14.0. However, given 
limited access to post-implantation human tissues, gastrulation 
remains one of the most mysterious phases of human development.
During mouse gastrulation, primordial germ cells (PGCs), pre-
cursors of sperm and egg, emerge at the boundary between pos-
terior EPI and ExE42,43. Data on human PGC specification remain 
sparse44. Existing data from NHP monkey embryos45 suggest that 
primate PGCs may emerge in the nascent AM prior to the gastrula-
Box 3 | Clinical benefits of human embryology
Advancing fundamental understanding of human embryogen-
esis can provide a scientific foundation for improving assisted 
human reproduction and prevention of pregnancy loss, birth de-
fects and teratogenesis. It will also advance the biology of germ 
cells and treatment of infertility. Advancing understanding of 
human implantation will help develop effective contraception 
technologies and treatments of recurrent implantation failure. 
Detailed understanding of the widespread epigenetic program-
ming during human embryonic development can provide im-
portant insights for disease progression in later life. Studying 
human development is critical for improving stem cell differen-
tiation protocols to mimic embryogenesis, to achieve desired cell 
functions for research and therapy.
E3.0
E4.5
E5.5
E6.5
E3.5
E7.0
E10.0
E14.0
E6.0
Mouse
Human
Zygote
Morula
Early
blastocyst 
Mature
blastocyst
Post-implantation
embryo
Gastrulation
Fig. 1 | Overview of mouse and human development from pre-implantation to the onset of gastrulation. Prior to implantation, both mouse and human 
embryos undergo cell divisions culminating in the development of a blastocyst, comprising an outer trophectoderm (TE) layer and an inner cell mass (ICM) 
that further segregates into epiblast (EPI, light blue) and primitive endoderm (PE, yellow; hypoblast in humans). The timing of blastocyst implantation 
differs between mice and humans (E5.0 in mouse and E7.0 in human). Furthermore, morphogenesis and lineage developments during peri-implantation 
mouse and human development show distinct features. Mouse development from E5.0–E6.5 leads to the formation of a cup-shaped EPI juxtaposed with 
TE-derived extraembryonic ectoderm (ExE), enclosing the pro-amniotic cavity. Concurrently, the PE forms the visceral endoderm (VE) that envelops 
both EPI and ExE. In contrast, soon after human blastocyst implantation, while the EPI undergoes lumenogenesis to form the pro-amniotic cavity, EPI cells 
adjacent to polar TE cells become specified into the amniotic ectoderm (AM, dark blue), with remaining pluripotent EPI cells forming the embryonic disc. 
By E6.5 for mice and E14.0 for humans, gastrulation is initiated in the posterior EPI compartment (gastrulating cells in red). Mouse primordial germ cells 
(PGCs) emerge at the boundary between posterior EPI and ExE at the onset of gastrulation (not shown). Data on primate PGC specification remain sparse. 
Existing data suggest that human PGCs may emerge in the nascent AM prior to the gastrulation (not shown). Human PGC specification requires additional 
studies for clarification.
Nature Materials | VOL 20 | February 2021 | 132–144 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
134
Review Article
NaTuRe MaTeRials
Box 4 | Early mouse and human development
Pre-implantation development. Pre-implantation mouse and 
human development displays intricate self-organization and au-
tonomy. After fertilization, the one-cell zygote undergoes cleavage 
cell divisions to form a solid ball of cells resembling a mulberry 
(and hence the name morula). Cells of the morula begin to differ-
entiate, leading to blastocyst formation. In the blastocyst, the tro-
phectoderm (TE) surrounds a fluid-filled cavity (blastocoel) with 
an inner cell mass (ICM) on one side. The TE is an extraembryonic 
tissue and will give rise to the placenta. As the blastocyst develops, 
the ICM becomes segregated into two distinct cell populations: 
the embryonic epiblast (EPI), which will give rise to the embryo 
proper, and a second extraembryonic tissue known as the primi-
tive endoderm (PE; or hypoblast in human). Pre-implantation de-
velopment has been extensively studied using the mouse embryo, 
revealing important cellular and morphogenetic events including 
position-dependent TE/ICM patterning, the blastocoelic cavity 
formation, and lineage segregation and sorting of EPI and PE in 
the ICM. The readers are referred to some excellent reviews on the 
mouse blastocyst development31,32. Human blastocyst formation 
remains incompletely understood3,111. Existing data suggests that 
there are differences in timing, in gene expression and potential-
ly in mechanisms of lineage development and function between 
mice and humans during pre-implantation development2.
Peri-implantation development. Successful implantation involves 
a bilateral interaction between a competent blastocyst and a 
receptive uterus. Implantation of the blastocyst (E5.0 in mouse and 
E7.0 in human) triggers major morphological reorganization and 
lineage developments. Upon implantation of the mouse blastocyst, 
the TE adjacent to the EPI (polar TE) forms the extraembryonic 
ectoderm (ExE) and ectoplacental cone. Concomitantly, the EPI 
and ExE each undergo lumenogenesis so that separate apical 
lumens are formed in each compartment84,105. The two lumenal 
cavities soon fuse to establish the pro-amniotic cavity, leading to 
the formation of a cup-shaped EPI juxtaposed with the ExE at E6.0 
(the egg cylinder). From E5.0 to E6.0, the PE forms the parietal 
endoderm and visceral endoderm (VE). By E6.0, the VE envelops 
both the EPI and ExE, setting the stage for gastrulation.
Morphogenesis and lineage development in the peri- 
implantation human embryo show distinct features compared 
with mice34. Upon implantation, the EPI undergoes lumenogenesis 
to form the pro-amniotic cavity5–7, similar to the mouse EPI. 
Distinctly, the lumenal EPI soon breaks symmetry and resolves 
into the bipolar patterned EPI-amnion sac7,33. Specifically, EPI 
cells adjacent to invading polar TE cells differentiate into the 
amniotic ectoderm (AM)7,33, an extraembryonic tissue involved in 
future fetal membrane development. The EPI cells at the opposite 
pole adjacent to the hypoblast remain pluripotent and become 
thickened and more columnar, forming the embryonic disc. Thus, 
the pre-gastrulation EPI displays distinct topologies between 
humans and mice: discoid in human and cup-shaped in mouse. 
The mouse embryo does not develop the bipolar EPI-amnion 
structure. In mice, the AM emerges as amniotic folds at the 
junction of the EPI and ExE during gastrulation112,113.
Gastrulation. Prior to mouse gastrulation, reciprocal 
interactions between EPI, ExE and VE lead to regionalized 
patterning in these tissues35,36. Regionalization of VE is particularly 
important, leading to the formation of the anterior VE or AVE at 
the prospective anterior side of the embryo37,38. The AVE secrets 
antagonists to shield overlying EPI cells from differentiation. 
Development of the AVE thus breaks radial symmetry and marks 
anterior–posterior (A–P) axis formation in the mouse embryo. 
Soon after, gastrulation is initiated at the proximal, posterior end 
of the EPI by a convergence of BMP-WNT-NODAL signalling 
interactions between EPI, ExE and VE39–41. The antagonists 
secreted by the AVE block signalling and impart neuroectoderm 
characters at the anterior pole of the EPI38, whereas signals at the 
proximal, posterior end of the EPI instruct cells to undergo the 
epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) and ingress through the 
PS to acquire mesendodermal fates39. During mouse gastrulation, 
primordial germ cells (PGCs) emerge at the proximal, posterior 
end of the EPI42,43. Experimental evidence supports that 
prospective PGCs are selected from somatic, gastrulating EPI cells 
by dose-dependent BMP signals that originate from the ExE114.
Gastrulation remains one of the most mysterious phases of 
human development. Recent studies of NHP monkey embryos 
suggest conserved mechanisms are likely to be in play for A–P 
patterning during human gastrulation12,45. Limited data from NHP 
monkey45 and in vitro cultured human embryos44 suggest that PGCs 
may emerge in the dorsal nascent AM soon after implantation. 
This unexpected finding will require additional confirmation.
After gastrulation, the EPI in mouse and human embryos 
transforms into a trilaminar structure consisting of ectoderm, 
mesoderm and endoderm. As gastrulation proceeds, it brings 
subpopulations of cells in the three germ layer linages into 
proximity so that they can undergo inductive interactions to 
pattern layers and specify new cell types, driving the development 
of organ rudiments.
Neurulation. Gastrulation is followed by neurulation. During 
neurulation, the ectoderm is first patterned into the neuroectoderm 
(neural plate) in the medial portion of the embryo flanked by 
future epidermis. At the border between these regions, the neural 
crest and placodes form in response to BMP and WNT signals 
emanated from surrounding tissues115,116. The neural plate soon 
folds into the neural tube (NT)46,47, with its anterior and posterior 
regions giving rise to the brain and spinal cord, respectively. Cells 
in the NT continue to differentiate under the influence of inductive 
factors emanating from surrounding tissues. Sonic hedgehog 
(Shh)-mediated transcriptional networks that control ventral 
patterning of the mouse spinal cord have been well elucidated48,49.
Human neurulation remains challenging to study, even 
though NT closure defects remain one of the most common 
birth defects46,47. Recent studies suggest that late-manifesting 
neurodegenerative disorders, such as Huntington’s disease, may 
have a neurodevelopmental component25,117. The role of early 
nervous system development in late-onset neurodegenerative 
disorders remains a debated topic.
While the ectoderm undergoes neurulation, the mesoderm and 
endoderm also become further specified. Specifically, mesodermal 
cells are organized into cardiogenic mesoderm, axial mesoderm 
of the prechordal plate and notochord, paraxial mesoderm, 
intermediate mesoderm and lateral plate mesoderm. Each of these 
mesodermal regions undergoes some form of segmentation. The 
most evident and complete segmentation occurs in the paraxial 
trunk mesoderm, where each segment becomes an entirely 
separate somite. Much of the other mesodermal regions develop 
into embryonic connective tissues, cardiovascular and lymphatic 
systems, skeletal muscle cells, most of the urogenital system, 
and the lining of the pericardial, pleural and peritoneal cavities. 
Following gastrulation, the endoderm folds to form the primitive 
gut tube consisting of three subdivisions: foregut, midgut and 
hindgut, which subsequently give rise to the epithelial lining of 
the digestive and respiratory systems.
Nature Materials | VOL 20 | February 2021 | 132–144 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
135
Review Article
NaTuRe MaTeRials
tion. Additional studies are required to determine whether the same 
is true for human PGCs.
In mouse and human embryos, gastrulation transforms the 
EPI into a trilaminar structure consisting of definitive ectoderm, 
mesoderm and endoderm. The three germ layers undergo induc-
tive interactions to pattern layers and specify new cell types, driving 
organ rudiment development (Box 4). Following gastrulation, the 
ectoderm undergoes neurulation, in which the neural plate is first 
patterned in the dorsal ectoderm before folding into the neural tube 
(NT)46,47 (Box 4). Cells in the NT continue to differentiate into dif-
ferent classes of neuronal progenitors48,49. Concomitantly, mesoder-
mal cells are organized into different regions to from the primordia 
of major organ systems including cardiovascular and lymphatic sys-
tems and skeletal muscle cells. Simultaneously, the endoderm will 
fold to form the primitive gut tube, which will produce the digestive 
and respiratory systems.
Embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells as building 
blocks
As a bottom-up approach, the development of embryoids uses 
embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells, including those derived 
from embryos, as building blocks to construct models to recapitu-
late embryonic development (Fig. 2).
Mouse stem cells. The EPI cells of the mouse blastocyst are plu-
ripotent, and their functional, epigenetic and signalling properties 
have been extensively characterized. These studies reveal that plu-
ripotency is dynamic and progressive. As the mouse embryo devel-
ops from blastula to gastrula, EPI cells transit from a naive state, in 
which they do not respond to inductive signals, to a primed state in 
which they readily differentiate50. The transition between naive and 
primed states has been referred to as formative pluripotency during 
which EPI cells gain the capacity to make lineage decisions51.
Mouse pluripotent stem cells (mPSCs) in culture display a simi-
lar continuum of states. Mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) with 
naive pluripotency can be isolated directly from the ICM of the 
mouse blastocyst and maintained in culture52,53. In contrast, mouse 
stem cells corresponding to the primed state, known as mouse epi-
blast stem cells (mEpiSCs), are derived from the post-implantation 
mouse EPI54,55. mEpiSCs exhibit more advanced developmental fea-
tures consistent with the early-gastrulation EPI56. Mouse EPI-like 
cells (mEpiLCs) with formative pluripotency have been generated 
from mESCs in vitro, with a transcriptional profile consistent with 
early post-implantation mouse EPI57.
Stem cell lines representative of extraembryonic lineages in 
the mouse blastocyst have also been established, including mouse 
trophoblast stem cells (mTSCs)58 and extraembryonic endoderm 
(XEN) cells representing the stem cell population of the PE59.
Human stem cells. Human ESCs (hESCs) have also been success-
fully derived from human blastocysts60. However, hESCs have a 
transcriptome and methylome different from the EPI of the human 
blastocyst61,62, suggesting that the conditions in which hESCs are 
cultured fail to capture the pre-implantation developmental pro-
gramme of the human embryo. Instead, hESCs are developmentally 
similar to the post-implantation, pre-gastrulation EPI in cynomol-
gus monkey embryos12. Consistently, hESCs more closely resemble 
mEpiSCs than mESCs in terms of molecular properties, lineage 
potency and culture conditions50,54,55. However, there are still some 
notable differences in gene expression63 and in the propensity for 
E2.0
E5.0
E4.5
E5.75
E7.0ÐE8.0
E12.0ÐE13.0
E7.0
Mouse
Human
EPSCs
EPSCs
Induced embryonic 
and extraembryonic 
stem cells 
Induced embryonic 
and extraembryonic 
stem cells 
Naive ESCs
EpiLCs
EpiSCs
Primed ESCs
Naive ESCs
XEN cells
HypoSCs
TSCs
TSCs
Adult
Fig. 2 | Mouse and human embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells and their corresponding developmental potencies. Expanded potential stem cells 
(EPSCs) are established by isolating individual cells (or blastomeres) from eight-cell stage mouse and human embryos (or morula). By isolating cells from 
mouse blastocysts, mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) with naive pluripotency, trophoblast stem cells (mTSCs), and extraembryonic endoderm (mXEN) 
cells representing the stem cell population of the primitive endoderm (PE) have been established. Similarly, human trophoblast stem cells (hTSCs) have 
been derived from human blastocyst. Primed mouse ESCs, known as mouse epiblast stem cells (mEpiSCs), are derived from the late post-implantation, 
pre-gastrulation mouse EPI. Mouse EPI-like cells (EpiLCs) with an intermediate or formative state between naive and primed pluripotency have been 
generated from mESCs in vitro, with a transcriptional profile similar to the early post-implantation mouse EPI. Human ESCs (hESCs) with primed 
pluripotency have also been derived from pre-implantation human blastocysts. Using strategies such as reprogramming, differentiated somatic mouse and 
human cells can be converted to induced embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells, including induced pluripotent stem cells, or iPSCs. Using chemical 
cocktails, primed hESCs can be reverted into a naive-like pluripotent state. Human hypoblast stem cells (hypoSCs) can be generated using these chemically 
reset naive hESC lines.
Nature Materials | VOL 20 | February 2021 | 132–144 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
136
Review Article
NaTuRe MaTeRials
PGC formation between hESCs and mEpiSCs, as hESCs can initi-
ate PGC formation whereas mEpiSCs cannot64,65. There are recent 
reports showing derivations of hESC lines from human blasto-
cysts with naive pluripotency features66,67, and of chemical repro-
gramming cocktails capable of converting hESCs from primed to 
naive pluripotency68,69. However, functional validations of naive 
pluripotency including chimera formation and germline transmis-
sion as well as tetraploid complementation, which have been used 
for mESCs, cannot be implemented with human cells for ethical 
reasons. To address this issue, there are ongoing discussions of a 
testable functional framework to assess naive pluripotency in 
human cells33.
Somatic human cells can also be converted to a pluripotent 
state by cell fusion, somatic cell nuclear transfer, transcription 
factor-based reprogramming, and chemical reprogramming70. 
Pluripotent stem cells generated by these reprogramming strategies 
are called induced pluripotent stem cells, or iPSCs. Human iPSCs 
(hiPSCs) are considered molecularly and functionally equivalent 
to hESCs71.
Recently, through chemical screening, individual blastomeres 
isolated from eight-cell stage mouse morula were successfully cul-
tured to establish mouse expanded potential stem cells (mEPSCs) 
that appear to possess developmental potency for all embryonic and 
extraembryonic lineages in blastocyst chimaera assays72,73. Using 
similar approaches, human EPSCs (hEPSCs) were also derived 
from primed hESCs and hiPSCs, and hEPSCs are shown to have the 
potency to form trophoblast stem cells74.
In contrast to mouse extraembryonic stem cells, human extra-
embryonic stem cells have only emerged recently. Using chemical 
screening, human trophoblast stem cells (hTSCs) were first derived 
from human blastocysts and first-trimester placental tissues75. 
Human hypoblast stem cells (hypoSCs) were also recently reported 
using chemically reset naive hESC lines76. Recent work showed that 
chemically reprogrammed naive hESCs could give rise to hTSCs 
when cultured in appropriate conditions77, and that both chemi-
cally reset and embryo-derived naive hESCs could be used to derive 
hTSC lines78. With the emergence of these human extraembryonic 
cell lines as well as hEPSCs, it becomes imperative for additional 
molecular and functional characterizations for authentication 
and establishing their developmental identities compared to their 
in vivo counterparts78,79.
A rapidly growing toolbox of embryoids
Stem cells serve as building blocks for the development of embry-
oids that recapitulate different stages of mammalian development, 
from blastula through gastrula or early neurula and organogenesis 
(Fig. 3). Development of embryoids use the same developmental 
principles that manifest in mammalian development. Importantly, 
embryoids have already generated new insights into early mamma-
lian development.
Embryoid to model blastocyst development. The first embry-
oid to model blastocyst formation (or blastoid) was successfully 
developed by mixing mESCs with mTSCs at a defined ratio under 
appropriate culture conditions, leading to their self-assembly into 
a tissue organization reminiscent of the mouse blastocyst22. As 
in vivo, mouse blastoids possess an outer TE layer surrounding a 
compact ICM-like compartment, and their transcriptome is more 
similar to mouse blastocyst than is achieved by simply combining 
mESC and mTSC transcriptomes. Mouse blastoids have been used 
to dissect interactions between embryonic and extraembryonic 
compartments, revealing that NODAL and BMP signals from the 
ICM-like compartment are important for growth and morphogen-
esis of TE cells22. This insight has proven useful for improving cul-
ture conditions of mTSCs80. In the initial blastoid protocol, further 
cell segregation and sorting of ICM-like cells into PE-like cells was 
inefficient. Optimization studies yielded improved conditions in 
which the relative proportions of the three cell lineages (EPI-, TE- 
and PE-like cells) more closely resemble that of mouse blastocyst81. 
Remarkably, culture of mEPSCs in appropriate conditions yields 
self-organized blastoids consisting of EPI-, TE- and PE-like cells30. 
Another recent work mixing mEPSCs with mTSCs also led to the 
formation of blastoids that showed developmental progression from 
the pre- to post-implantation egg cylinder morphology in vitro82, 
similar to the mouse ETX embryoid described below. Although 
capable of implanting in the mouse uterus, all of the mouse blas-
toids fail to develop much further than the blastocyst stage either 
in vitro or in vivo. The reasons for this are not currently under-
stood and may point to a requirement for greater organization than 
currently achieved in mouse blastoids. It remains to be determined 
whether human blastoids can be generated by using either naive 
hPSCs or hEPSCs with or without hTSCs or hypoSCs under suitable 
culture environments.
Human amniotic sac embryoid. During early post-implantation 
human development, a patterned bipolar EPI-AM structure arises 
from the EPI. It was recently shown that culturing primed hPSCs 
on a soft culture surface together with native extracellular matrix 
(ECM) proteins (that is, Geltrex) diluted in culture medium leads to 
the formation of a spherical lumenal hPSC colony20. This observa-
tion is consistent with the intrinsic lumenogenic property associ-
ated with primed but not naive hPSCs83,84. Interestingly, hPSCs in 
the colony lose pluripotency and differentiate into amniotic cells, 
even without exogenous inductive factors in the culture medium20. 
If only one of these culture elements is present, either a soft substrate 
or diluted gel in the culture medium, primed hPSCs form lumenal 
sacs but retain pluripotency, suggesting that amniotic differentia-
tion of hPSCs is mechanosensitive20. Amniotic differentiation of 
hPSCs requires endogenous BMP signalling, and its inhibition 
under amnion-differentiation conditions is sufficient for rescuing 
hPSC pluripotency20.
A small fraction of lumenal sacs, rather than differentiating 
entirely into amniotic tissues, spontaneously break symmetry and 
form a bipolar structure with columnar pluripotent cells on one 
side and amniotic cells on the other, mimicking EPI-AM pattern-
ing in the pre-gastrulation human embryo20. This model is termed 
the post-implantation amniotic sac embryoid (PASE). Symmetry 
breaking in the PASE also depends on BMP activity, and active 
BMP signalling is only evident at the prospective AM-like pole20. 
Progressive development of the PASE results in EPI-like cells fur-
ther differentiating into PS-like cells. This spontaneous symmetry 
breaking occurs in only 5–10% of lumenal hPSC sacs. To increase 
efficiency of PASE formation, a microfluidic PASE model has 
recently been developed27. This microfluidic device allows small 
clusters of primed hPSCs to be grown in small indentations with 
separate channels supplying culture medium to each side27. Flowing 
BMP4 in only one of these channels leads to reproducible pat-
terning of amniotic cells only on the side exposed to BMP427. The 
opposite side remains pluripotent but soon goes on to differentiate 
into PS-like cells27. The identity of PS derivatives can be modulated 
by stimulating this side of the cell clusters with additional ligands: 
WNT stimulation together with either BMP4 or ACTIVIN-A leads 
to posterior and anterior PS derivatives, respectively27. Importantly, 
human PGC-like cells (hPGCLCs) emerge in the microfluidic PASE 
before it initiates gastrulation-like events27, suggesting applications 
of the microfluidic PASE model for studying the origin and specifi-
cation of hPGCs.
The PASE represents the first embryoid to model early 
post-implantation development of the EPI and AM compartments 
of the human embryo. It also suggests the inductive role of AM in 
triggering human gastrulation. Although the microfluidic PASE 
model considerably improves the controllability of EPI-AM pat-
Nature Materials | VOL 20 | February 2021 | 132–144 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
137
Review Article
NaTuRe MaTeRials
terning, further asymmetries are not demonstrated and the EPI-like 
compartment is either entirely anterior or posterior in character. 
Prolonged culture of the PASE is also limited by the confined space 
in the microfluidic device. Furthermore, disseminating cells from 
the PASE mimicking gastrulation would lead to its disassembly. 
Future efforts should be devoted to identifying a strategy to prolong 
the culture of the PASE and promote self-organization of gastrulat-
ing cells. It is possible that adding human extraembryonic stem cells 
including hypoSCs to the PASE will be helpful for these efforts.
Two-dimensional models of gastrulation. Treatment of primed 
hPSCs confined to micropatterned colonies with BMP4 reproducibly 
leads to organized differentiation with putative TE-like cells on the 
colony outer edge, ectodermal cells in the colony centre, and meso-
dermal and endodermal cells forming two layers in between18,85,86. 
This multicellular pattern is consistent as in the gastrulating mam-
malian embryo. However, the fate territories in the two-dimensional 
(2D) gastrulation model are adjacent on a 2D surface rather than lay-
ered one on top of the other as in in vivo. Although the 2D geometry 
is artificial and distinct from the three-dimensional (3D) topology 
of mammalian embryos, the reproducibility and compatibility with 
live imaging of the 2D gastrulation model has allowed quantifica-
tion of the self-organized signalling dynamics that drive these pat-
terning events87–90. These studies have revealed that rather than 
creating stable gradients, cells generate dynamic expanding fronts 
of endogenous WNT and NODAL signalling that are interpreted 
combinatorially to pattern different germ layers. These studies can 
serve as a template for investigating the mechanisms of patterning 
through signalling dynamics in other embryoids. Interestingly, in 
colonies treated with WNT rather than BMP4, similar cell fate pat-
terns are observed but with a different mechanism, which involves 
a wave of epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) that sensi-
tizes cells to the exogenous WNT signal91. Mouse gastrulation has 
also been successfully modelled using the 2D gastrulation embry-
oid with mouse EpiLCs92. Importantly, findings from this mouse 
embryoid have been compared to the mouse embryo, providing a 
more direct validation, which for obvious reasons is not possible 
for human gastrulation embryoids. Micropatterning can be read-
ily combined with other bioengineering approaches. For example, 
recent work has shown that overlaying gradients of exogenous 
ligands on micropatterned 2D gastrulation embryoids can bias the 
resulting fate pattern in a reproducible way93. Specifically, a gradi-
E4.5
E5.5
E6.5
Implantation
Gastrulation
E7.0
E10.0
E14.0
Implantation
Gastrulation
2D gastrulation model
3D blastoid
3D gastruloid
3D ETX embryoid
3D trunk-like structure
3D PASE
3D epiblast patterning model
2D gastrulation model
3D gastruloid
2D neurulation model
Fig. 3 | Existing embryoids that recapitulate different stages of mouse and human development. 3D blastoids are embryoids for modelling 
pre-implantation blastocyst development. 3D ETX embryoids model post-implantation embryo development up to early gastrulation. 3D gastruloid 
and trunk-like structure are embryoids to model post-gastrulation development of the posterior portion of the embryo. The 2D gastrulation model is an 
embryoid for modelling germ layer patterning during gastrulation. The 3D epiblast patterning model is an embryoid for modelling epiblast morphogenesis 
and patterning during early post-implantation development. 3D post-implantation amniotic sac embryoid (PASE) models post-implantation human 
development up to early gastrulation. 2D neurulation models are embryoids for modelling the neurulation process, leading to neural tube development and 
patterning.
Nature Materials | VOL 20 | February 2021 | 132–144 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
138
Review Article
NaTuRe MaTeRials
ent of BMP4 (and in some cases a counteracting gradient of BMP 
antagonist NOGGIN) generated in a microfluidic device induced 
axially organized patterning of the germ layers along the gradient, 
breaking the radial symmetry of 2D circular colonies93.
3D models of gastrulation. In addition to blastoids, mESCs and 
mTSCs can be cultured together in conditions that promote their 
self-organization to model post-implantation mouse development. 
In such models, rather than forming structures that morphologically 
resemble the mouse blastocyst, mESCs and mTSCs form separate 
compartments before fusing together. Each compartment under-
goes lumenogenesis, with the resulting lumens merging together, 
resulting in a structure resembling the egg cylinder stage mouse 
embryo (referred to as the ETS embryoid)19. Remarkably, the ETS 
embryoid initiates developmental events mimicking both germ cell 
formation and PS development in an asymmetric manner19. This 
is surprising as VE, which is critical for A–P symmetry breaking 
in vivo, is not present in the ETS embryoid, although further studies 
show that adding XEN cells into the ETS embryoid improves this 
model (called the ETX embryoid)23.
A 3D embryoid for modelling symmetry breaking of the EPI has 
also been developed starting from primed hPSCs26. In this model, 
hPSCs grown in 3D and treated with a low dose of BMP4 form 
lumenal sacs before polarizing into two opposing regions displaying 
gene expression patterns associated with ectoderm and mesoderm 
induction26. This observation is similar to cell fate patterning that 
emerges from the 2D human gastrulation embryoid18. However, as 
the initial degree of symmetry is higher in 3D (sphere versus disc), 
the development of the 3D human gastrulation embryoid involves 
spontaneous symmetry breaking while in 2D it does not.
Finally, an embryoid model beginning from only mESCs 
or primed hPSCs has been shown to be able to model the 
post-gastrulation development of the posterior portion of the 
mouse and human embryos, respectively17,21,28,94. Growing these 
cells in aggregates of defined size and exposing them to a prop-
erly timed pulse of WNT activation leads to the formation of a 
tail-bud-like structure on one end of the aggregate that continues 
with axial organization, somitogenesis, PGC specification and 
even NT formation17,21,28,94. These structures, known as gastruloids, 
recapitulate some essential features of A–P axial patterning of the 
post-gastrulation mouse and human embryos as revealed by HOX 
gene expression and somite formation21,28,94. The mouse gastruloid 
can even be coaxed to generate a primitive beating heart following 
pathways similar to those of the mouse embryo95. These mouse and 
human gastruloids all lack anterior structures, such as the forebrain, 
likely to be due to the posteriorizing effect of WNT signalling.
While the 3D embryoid models of gastrulation show remark-
able emergence of patterning and morphogenesis, they lack the 
controllability and reproducibility of the 2D gastrulation models. 
Bioengineering approaches, which can control cell–cell interactions 
and modulate symmetry breaking and patterning, as in the micro-
fluidic PASE27, will be useful for improving the controllability and 
reproducibility of the 3D gastrulation models.
Models of neurulation. The nervous system acquires its form 
and pattern during the neurulation stage. Several stem-cell-based 
neurulation models have been developed, which focus on the ecto-
dermal germ layer, the source of the nervous system. One of the 
earliest studies showed that 3D spherical lumenal sacs composed of 
neuroepithelial (NE) cells, reminiscent of the NT, could be grown 
from single mESCs under appropriate neural differentiation condi-
tions15. These neural sacs were entirely dorsal in character but could 
be patterned by exogenous ventralizing or posteriorizing signals. 
Optimizing the gel matrix in which neural sacs were embedded also 
improved their dorsal–ventral (D–V) patterning, showing the power 
of bioengineering approaches to optimize conditions for embryoid 
self-organization96. D–V patterned neural sacs mimicking human 
NT development were recently demonstrated using primed hPSCs 
under a culture condition similar to that used for mESCs29.
Recently, several 2D models have been reported to recapitulate 
patterning of a considerable portion of the ectodermal germ layer. 
One study with primed hPSCs showed that regional patterning 
of neural crest and NE cells could be created on micropatterned 
surfaces, mimicking neural induction as the first step of the neu-
rulation process, and that this emergent regional patterning was 
regulated by mechanical control of BMP-SMAD signalling24. Other 
recent studies have recapitulated patterning of all four major fates 
within the ectoderm during neural induction—neural, neural crest, 
placode and epidermis25,97. Modulating both BMP and WNT sig-
nalling enabled control over the fates that emerged at the border 
between neural and non-neural ectoderm97, and one of these mod-
els was shown to be useful for modelling developmental effects 
of the mutations that cause Huntington’s disease25. In the future, 
models that recapitulate not only regional fate patterning, but also 
morphogenesis involved in neural plate folding and neural fold clo-
sure, could both lead to new fundamental knowledge of this stage of 
human development and provide essential systems for research into 
human NT closure defects.
Bioengineering tools to control embryoid development
Mammalian embryogenesis is a context-dependent process, involv-
ing interactions between multiple, co-emerging embryonic and 
extraembryonic cell lineages that ar