Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54375-y
Deep phenotypic proﬁling of neuroactive
drugs in larval zebraﬁsh
Leo Gendelev
1, Jack Taylor
1,2, Douglas Myers-Turnbull1, Steven Chen3,
Matthew N. McCarroll1,3, Michelle R. Arkin
3, David Kokel1
&
Michael J. Keiser
1,3,4,5
Behavioral larval zebraﬁsh screens leverage a high-throughput small molecule
discovery format to ﬁnd neuroactive molecules relevant to mammalian phy-
siology. We screen a library of 650 central nervous system active compounds
in high replicate to train deep metric learning models on zebraﬁsh behavioral
proﬁles. The machine learning initially exploited subtle artifacts in the phe-
notypic screen, necessitating a complete experimental re-run with rigorous
physical well-wise randomization. These large matched phenotypic screening
datasets (initial and well-randomized) provide a unique opportunity to quan-
tify and understand shortcut learning in a full-scale, real-world drug discovery
dataset. The ﬁnal deep metric learning model substantially outperforms cor-
relation distance–the canonical way of computing distances between
proﬁles–and generalizes to an orthogonal dataset of diverse drug-like com-
pounds. We validate predictions by prospective in vitro radio-ligand binding
assays against human protein targets, achieving a hit rate of 58% despite
crossing species and chemical scaffold boundaries. These neuroactive com-
pounds exhibit diverse chemical scaffolds, demonstrating that zebraﬁsh
phenotypic screens combined with metric learning achieve robust scaffold
hopping capabilities.
The mechanism of action of central nervous system (CNS) drugs
remains poorly understood, even for those used for decades (e.g.,
ketamine1). The complex nature of G-Protein Coupled Receptor
(GPCR) and ion channel-mediated pathways of the vertebrate nervous
system2–11 exacerbate the problem. Because of the prevalence of
polypharmacology in neuroactive drugs12, a magic bullet single-target
approach to drug discovery13 falls short14. Phenotypic screening cir-
cumvents these problems by identifying compounds that may interact
with individual or multiple targets15,16. These screens prioritize desired
and often biologically complex readouts of induced phenotypes on
higher-level model systems. Despite historically limited throughput,
rapid phenotypic proﬁling of thousands of compounds in vivo is now
possible using larval zebraﬁsh17–21. These vertebrates have high levels
of shared genetics22,23 and CNS anatomy24 (with humans) and scale to
high-throughput testing of complex behavioral readouts2–11. Pheno-
typic screening in larval zebraﬁsh, combined with human-target-based
cheminformatic methods such as the Similarity Ensemble Approach
(SEA25,26), and enrichment factor (EF) calculations10,27–29, have enabled
drug discovery and target deconvolution for neuroactive phenotypes
in mammals.
However, high-content zebraﬁsh behavioral screening data are
both a blessing and a curse for pharmacological studies because of the
challenges in extracting and comparing features in the collected video
data. In previous work, larval zebraﬁsh, plated on 96-well plates, were
Received: 20 March 2024
Accepted: 6 November 2024
Check for updates
1Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. 2UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences Memory
and Aging Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. 3Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA. 4Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. 5Bakar Computational Health
Sciences Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
e-mail: dave.kokel@gmail.com; keiser@keiserlab.org
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:9955 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
treated with various compounds, and various stimuli — including
acoustic stimuli and high-intensity light of different colors — elicited a
broad spectrum of behavioral responses in the ﬁsh10,28. Videos recor-
ded each well, from which a “motion-index” (MI) time series is com-
puted to measure bulk motion over time (Fig. 1a–d7, Fig. 1b and
Equation 1). Traditionally, the phenotypic distance between MI time
series is computed using correlation distance28. Other approaches
have included classiﬁcation and video analysis using machine
learning2,30–34.
Correlation
distance
reliably
discriminates
antipsychotic28 and anesthetic10,28,29 phenotypes but fails to distinguish
more subtle phenotypes. Indeed, ﬁsh rarely respond to stimuli in a
one-to-one video frame correspondence when each frame is 1/100th of
a second, breaking a basic assumption of how these MI distances are
traditionally computed. In an experiment with various assays, the
strength of the response to each assay may vary in drug-treated ﬁsh;
however, correlation distance values all frame contributions equally.
Various deep learning and unsupervised learning techniques have
been employed toward zebraﬁsh behavior classiﬁcation35. We sought a
distance metric that leveraged zebraﬁsh phenotypic screens for a
broader range of induced behaviors. Speciﬁcally, we used a class of
Fig. 1 | Zebraﬁsh behavioral screening and architecture. Diagrammatic repre-
sentation of zebraﬁsh experimental screening setup, motion index calculations,
and deep metric learning model architectures. a Simpliﬁed representation of a
zebraﬁsh screening platform, with larval zebraﬁsh in 96-well plates under a camera
subject to varied stimuli such as blue light, purple light, acoustic stimuli, and
physical tapping. b Example of a representative video frame. c Zoom view of a
single well. d Example motion index (MI) time series for clozapine-treated (gold)
ﬁsh and negative control (DMSO) (gray) wells. The MIs are averaged across all the
drug- and control-treated well replicates. A stimulus legend shows the stimuli types
occurring at different times in the assay. e Deep metric learning model archi-
tectures: Twin-NN (top) and Twin-DN (bottom). In both models, the input is a pair
of MI time-series vectors passing through multiple neural net layers. A contrastive
loss function72 scores the two learned output vectors (y1 and y2) distances based on
whether the input MI vectors were from the same or different treatments. As in (d)
above, gold denotes drug-treated MI, and gray is the negative control (DMSO).
Source data are provided in the Source Data File.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54375-y
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:9955 
2
neural networks uniquely suited for learning distances between pairs
of inputs (Siamese neural networks, or twin neural networks, twin-NNs,
Fig. 1e). These models were initially developed for biometric ﬁnger-
print veriﬁcation36, subsequently ﬁnding use in many machine learning
(ML) tasks, such as “one-shot learning” on small datasets for image
classiﬁcation37,38. Siamese networks pre-date and often became the
neural network models and loss functions subsequently adopted by
various studies in deep metric learning and contrastive learning. Sia-
mese networks have been applied to study zebraﬁsh behavior at lower
throughput39 or at higher throughput for embryonic development40,
but to our knowledge, not in the setting of high-throughput larval
zebraﬁsh phenotypic screening.
In this work, we screen a library of 650 ligands (from the SCREEN-
WELL Neurotransmitter Set, “NT-650”, Methods) in high-replicate and
train twin-NNs to relate drugs via the phenotypes they induce in larval
zebraﬁsh. We construct the screens from the ground up with ML
model training in mind, but the models still exploit unanticipated
artifacts in the resulting screen dataset via an undesirable process
known more broadly as “shortcut learning”41. We initially study the
effect of retraining the deep metric learning models on synthetically
randomized datasets that we design to test for confounding effects,
ultimately driving the redesign and re-collection of a new experimental
screen with full physical randomization. Models trained on the revised
screen cluster diverse neuroactive compounds in a way that corre-
sponds strikingly well with known neuroactive biology, and they
phenotypically link structurally distinct compounds by scaffold
hopping42,43. Finally, the learned distance metric generalizes to a
screening dataset of diverse drug-like compounds unseen during
training, automating the discovery of neuroactive compounds active
on human receptors when tested prospectively in vitro.
Results
Twin neural networks identify drug replicates from complex
behavioral readouts
We collect a high-throughput phenotypic dataset based on the NT-650
neurotransmitter library screened in high replications (7–10 replicates
per drug) for training machine learning models. We plate larval zeb-
raﬁsh onto 96-well plates (8 ﬁsh per well) and dose wells with drugs at a
10 µM concentration, a reasonable dose for in-vivo primary screening
of neuroactives (Fig. 1a–c). Various stimuli, such as acoustic sounds,
light stimulus, and physical tapping of the multi-well plate stage, are
performed to elicit diverse behavioral responses in the ﬁsh, as opti-
mized previously7 (Fig. 1d). We record videos of the ﬁsh’s behavior
throughout the experiment. For each well, we encode and convert
videos of larval ﬁsh into aggregate motion over time, resulting in a
time-series vector, or motion index (MI).
We evaluate how well twin NNs can identify whether two MI
proﬁles, such as those shown in Fig. 1e, originate from the same
category — speciﬁcally, whether they are caused by the same drug. This
is in contrast to other correlation metrics that often fail to reliably
recognize when different samples have been affected by the same
drug, especially when the resulting phenotypic changes are subtle. By
necessity, a Twin-NN must learn which time points are most informa-
tive and how to correct for slightly or partially misaligned MI traces to
correctly group same-drug replicates accurately across a diverse range
of pharmacology and their concomitant behavioral traces. Twin NNs
consist of twin encoding layers, which share model weights and
operate on a pair of different inputs (MI traces) to output a distance
reﬂecting whether the MIs represent replicates of the same drug
(distance = 0) or traces from mismatched drugs (distance > 1)36.
We ﬁlter the dataset to remove human drugs that do not alter
zebraﬁsh behavior, namely those whose MI traces cannot be dis-
tinguished from vehicle controls with a simple random forest model
(see “Methods”, Supplementary Fig. 1). Drugs can fail to induce strong
behavioral responses in zebraﬁsh due to many factors, including
differences in cross-species biology, concentration, incubation time,
absorption route, or other factors. The neural network embedding
architecture of each half of the model is a design choice; we implement
a fully connected multi-layer perceptron (Twin-NN) (Fig. 1e) as a
baseline model and a second architecture motivated by DenseNet44
(Twin-DN) as a more computationally expressive alternative. We con-
sidered using recurrent architectures – neural networks designed to
operate on sequences, such as the LSTM45 or GRU45,46 – but were
concerned that the long length of the time series samples raised issues
with vanishing gradients and run-time.
Prior work using zebraﬁsh behavioral MI for scaffold-hopping and
phenotypic drug discovery predominantly uses vector distance cal-
culations to compare MI traces without warping, alignment, or relative
weighting of individual time points. Compared to these conventional
correlation and Euclidean distance approaches, both the Twin-NN and
Twin-DN models discern positive (matched) and negative (mis-
matched) drug replicate pairs with drastically improved performance
(Fig. 2a), with Twin-DN scores achieving 0.97 ROC-AUC and 0.98 PRC-
AUC (Fig. 2b, c). We observe a near-perfect ability of the learned dis-
tance metric to discern MIs of replicates from the same drug from MIs
of different drugs. Further, a Uniform Manifold Approximation and
Projection (UMAP)47 plot (Fig. 2d), calculated over the means of the
time series for all replicates of all 650 drugs in the screen, yields pro-
nounced, discrete, and localized clusters. While heartening, this per-
formance was substantially higher than we had anticipated and to a
suspicious degree: many compounds do not reliably induce larval
zebraﬁsh behavioral phenotypes. Nevertheless, these results sug-
gested that nearly all the compound library’s experimental replicates
could be grouped by the Twin-DN model with near-perfect ﬁdelity. We
wondered whether the model’s exceptional performance might rely
instead on shortcut learning41 or the exploitation of hidden artifactual
cues encoded within the data that were invisible to human researchers
but perceivable by the deep learning model.
Machine learning exploits high-frequency components and
plate-location effects
We evaluate the presence of shortcut learning in our model by testing
how well the learned distance metric generalizes to an archival quality
control (QC) screen (“Methods”) performed at an earlier time on data
never seen by the metric-learning models. For this screen, we select 14
drugs with diverse mechanisms of action (MOAs) and assay them, also
in high replications, along with a vehicle (dimethyl sulfoxide; DMSO)
control and lethal control (eugenol). To test generalizability, we train a
k-nearest neighbors classiﬁer on the QC replicates using one of three
distance metrics: Twin-NN, Twin-DN, or correlation distance (“Meth-
ods”). For most drugs, the Twin-DN distance metric underperforms
correlation distance (Fig. 2e, orange bars). We suspected that the
expressive Twin-DN models readily memorize the high-frequency
components in the time series, which may come from artifacts such as
plate vibrations or high-frequency noise in the imaging sensor. Indeed,
when we ablate the high-frequency components of the time series
(with a Hanning smoothing ﬁlter48 as implemented in the scipy
package49), Twin-DN performance drops precipitously on the original
NT-650 screen, with Twin-NN performance likewise dropping, but to a
lesser extent (Fig. 2c, d). These results indicate that the learned dis-
tance metrics exploit the high-frequency components of the NT-650
screen data and that these hidden “shortcut” patterns do not gen-
eralize to the separate QC screen.
Per standard practice, we had already attempted to address
potential overﬁtting or data leakage by splitting the training and vali-
dation sets by drug - leaving no replicates of any one drug in common
between train and validation splits. In addition, we performed a set of
further machine-learning soundness checks (scrambling data labels
and randomizing the training data features (Supplementary Fig. 2), so
the Twin-DN model’s evident exploitation of high-frequency signal was
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54375-y
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:9955 
3
initially surprising. However, all compounds in the NT-650 library
arrived from the supplier in preset layouts, meaning all replicates of
the same compounds (or all positive pairs) in the dataset always cor-
responded to identical plate locations. In contrast, mismatched pairs
could come from any combination of compound locations across and
within the plates. Our original experimental design for the screen did
not control forthe potentially confounding layout effect. Even a simple
machine-learning architecture might be able to learn light-based pat-
terns for distinguishing different location pairs. The Twin-DN model
performance took the biggest hit with data smoothing, suggesting that
the more expressive a model is, the more readily it can exploit feature
shortcuts.
d.
b.
c.
colors = k-means 
clusters
Receiver Operating 
Characteristic curves
Precision–recall curves
a.
Twin-NN k-means clusters
Correlation
Euclidean
e.
Twin-NN Diff
Twin-DN Diff
toxic
Twin-DN
Twin-NN
Fig. 2 | Metric learning models exploit high-frequency components of time-
series signals in an initial non-randomized screen. We compare the Twin-NN and
Twin-DN models against traditional methods such as correlation and Euclidean
distance on both raw and smoothed motion index (MI) time series data and
examine how well the models cluster drugs and generalize to a separate dataset not
used for training. a Separation of positive (treatment replicate) and negative
(mismatched replicates) MI vector pairs using the Twin-DN model (left), the Twin-
NN model (2nd column), correlation distance (“Correlation,” 3rd column), and
Euclidean distance (“Euclidean,” right). The Twin-DN and Twin-NN models exhibit a
drastically improved ability to separate positive from negative pairs, as evidenced
by the strong distance separation (x-axis) between the positive and negative pair
distributions. Euclidean and correlation distances fail to separate the same- from
mismatched replicates for most MI pairs, except for those with minimal distances
(e.g., the most phenotypically similar pairs). b Receiver operator characteristic
plots. Twin-DN achieves the best area under the curve (AUC = 0.97), followed by
Twin-NN (0.89). Performance dropped drastically for both learning models using
MI time-series inputs smoothed with a Hanning window48 of size 11, particularly
Twin-DN (from 0.97 to 0.78). Correlation and Euclidean distance were robust to
Hanning smoothing. c Precision recall curves, showing trends consistent with (c).
d A UMAP47 using the Twin-DN distances reveals extreme clustering with distinct
phenotypic islands; as many drugs are unlikely to induce strong phenotypes in the
ﬁsh, this was an unexpected and suspicious result. e We trained k-Nearest-Neighbor
(kNN) classiﬁers using scikit learn63 on a separate high-replicate MI trace dataset of
16 quality control drugs never used for training or model evaluation. For many
drugs (e.g., haloperidol), the Twin-DN-based distance underperforms the zero-
baseline deﬁned by kNNs using correlation distance. Twin-NN distance outper-
forms correlation distance on a few drugs (e.g., tiagabine and lidocaine) and always
matches or exceeds the Twin-DN model. Source data are provided in the Source
Data File.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54375-y
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:9955 
4
An optimized experimental screening design
To unequivocally control for within-plate positional confounding
effects, we perform a second high replicate screen of NT-650, but this
time with the treatments fully robotically randomized across plates
and wells (“Methods”). We also include wells treated with a high dose
of the anesthetic eugenol as a control7 baseline for lethality. We take a
near-identical approach to pre-ﬁlter for drugs without effect as in the
original screen, except that we use the random forest model to label
the MI proﬁle into three possible bins: “active,” “inactive,” and “lethal”
(“Methods”, Supplemental Fig. 1).
We train new Twin-NN and Twin-DN models on this experimen-
tally randomized NT-650 dataset (NT-650-revised). While the SNN
models achieved slightly lesser performance on the randomized
dataset than on the original non-randomized (NT-650-naive) well lay-
out dataset (e.g., 0.84 vs. 0.89 AUROC for Twin-NN and 0.84 vs. 0.97
AUROC for Twin-DN), their performance still dramatically exceeded
that of correlation distance and Euclidean distance approaches (0.66
and 0.62 AUROC, respectively). Striking differences in the distribution
of Twin-NN and Twin-DN distances for the positive and negative pairs
(Fig. 3a) agree with greater ROC-AUC and PRC-AUC performance
(Fig. 3b, c). Fast-DTW, a popular dynamic time-warping approach for
time series prediction that optimizes the alignment between time
series50, marginally improves on Euclidean distance and falls short of
correlation distance in classifying positive versus negative pairs.
Training these baseline models on the NT-650-revised screen with
computationally smoothed high-frequency components did not
signiﬁcantly reduce performance, indicating the models no longer rely
on high-frequency feature components.
Another way of assessing model performance is by measuring its
ability to identify replicates of a compound. In the ideal case, a model
can identify all replicates for compounds that induce signiﬁcant
behavioral responses. In practice, experimental replicates will often be
ineffective for many reasons. However, the better a model performs,
the more replicates across drugs it can identify. Although correlation
distance identiﬁed one replicate for most drugs, it rarely identiﬁed
three or more replicates, whereas Twin-NN did so frequently and
sometimes picked up all 7–8 replicates (Fig. 3d). This effect is
emphasized by the early plateauing of the cumulative count curve for
correlation distance. The total cumulative count does not reach the
total number of drugs for either method because no method perfectly
identiﬁed all replicates for all drugs, some of which may have been
inactive and thus indistinguishable from negative control (DMSO).
Mapping a larval zebraﬁsh “behaviorome”
Using the Twin-NN learned distance metric, we cluster the compounds’
MI traces from the fully randomized NT-650 screen and visualize the
resulting phenotypic landscape by UMAP47 (Fig. 4a). We observed
deﬁned clustering and structure within this view, representing a
behavior-based pharmacological map of 650 known human drugs in
larval zebraﬁsh. Ineffective drugs populated the yellow region, while
drugs inducing behavioral readout changes favored the violet region.
The most robust phenotypes appeared towards the bottom of the plot,
b.
d.
Receiver operating 
characteristic curves
Precision–recall curves
c.
Replicate identification
 Twin-NN
 Corr
a.
Fig. 3 | Metric learning operates actionably on a fully randomized screen. We
investigate models trained on the second, fully randomized screen. a Separation of
positive and negative motion index (MI) trace pairs from the fully randomized
screen with Twin-NN (left), Twin-DN (2nd column), correlation (3rd column),
euclidean (4th column), and Fast-DTW (right) distances. Assessed as in Fig. 2a, the
revised deep learning models signiﬁcantly outperform correlation, euclidean, and
fast-DTW distances. b Twin-NN and Twin-DN receiver operator characteristic per-
formance is similar (AUC = 0.84 and 0.79, respectively) and signiﬁcantly exceeds
correlation, euclidean, and fast-DTW (0.66, 0.62, and 0.64). Notably, models
trained with and without Hanning smoothing no longer differ signiﬁcantly.
c Precision recall curves are consistent with (b). d The Twin-NN model identiﬁes
matched drug replicates more effectively than correlation distance, which typically
starts to fail beyond one replicate. We compute an all-by-all distance matrix across
NT-650 compounds at the individual replicate level and determine how many
replicate wells of the compound appear within the top 50 most similar ranked wells.
We plot the cumulative total of unique drugs (y-axis) versus the increasing count of
identiﬁed replicates (x-axis). The y-axis maximum does not reach the total number
of NT-650 compounds because neither method perfectly ranks all replicates within
the top 50 most phenotypically similar ranked wells for all NT-650 compounds.
Indeed, some compounds are inactive, with replicates indistinguishable from
DMSO. Source data are provided in the Source Data File.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54375-y
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:9955 
5
falling in the negative value range for principal component 2 (y-axis) of
the UMAP. When we colored the 325-compound subset predicted to
have strong phenotypes (“Methods”) by the generic functional classes
corresponding to plate-wide assignments by the chemical vendor (e.g.,
“opioids”, “serotonergic ligands”), we observed only a weakcorrelation
with the position in the UMAP (Supplementary Fig. 16). This was
unsurprising,
as
these classes
do
not
account
for
the
poly-
pharmacology of many neuroactive compounds.
One qualitative way to assess the behaviorome layout is whether
speciﬁc drugs with similar known MOAs and indications group toge-
ther. We highlight several such drugs in this plot with labels. The SSRIs
ﬂuoxetine and paroxetine clustered (labels 2,13) but distinctly sepa-
rated from the tricyclic antidepressant clomipramine (label 4),
although these shared a broader neighborhood as expected. This
observation is consistent with the intuition that behaviors based on
different classes of antidepressants should be more closely related to
each other than to other classes of neuroactive drugs, such as stimu-
lants. The dopamine D2/3 agonizts lisuride and PD 128,907 also
appeared in a similar region of space (labels 10,12). Antipsychotics
clozapine and mianserin appeared closely in phenotypic space (labels
1,7). Through the lens of correlation distance instead (Supplementary
Fig. 3), we see some similar high-level patterns but less behaviorome
structure. For example, mianserin and loxapine are no longer neigh-
bors; indeed, mianserin (label 1) appears closer to paroxetine (label 2)
than to loxapine (label 7). In other words, correlation distance places
an antipsychotic closer to an SSRI than another antipsychotic, sug-
gesting a lower clustering quality based on this region’s canonical
MOAs and indications.
Model generalization to an orthogonal library of diverse drug-
like compounds
We test the ability of the machine learning model to generalize to a
library of diverse drug-like compounds from the DIVERSet, which had
been screened months before the NT-650 set. The prior screen con-
tained compounds with less than 0.3 Tanimoto Similarity, on average,
to their closest match in NT-650 (Supplementary Fig. 14). Its goal was
neuroactive compound discovery rather than quality control or model
training; thus, it traded fewer replicates than NT-650 for greater
compound diversity. We previously used a similar library to discover
drug-like compounds that cause paradoxical excitation in larval
zebraﬁsh10,28,29. In that study, we performed the phenotypic screen with
the DIVERSet library, and the resulting MI traces were compared (using
correlation distance) against a reference drug, etomidate, that con-
sistently induced a strong phenotype in the larval zebraﬁsh.
Here, we investigate if the learned distance model outperforms
correlation distance in identifying drug-like compounds from the
DIVERSet library that cause similar phenotypes. Instead of focusing on
a single known reference drug, we calculate a distance matrix for every
Fig. 4 | A learned phenotypic distance identiﬁes islands of drugs by protein
target proﬁle that correlation distance cannot. We investigate how well the
learned phenotypic distance meaningfully clusters drugs using a UMAP47 on Twin-
NN distances between the average time series across all replicates of each drug of
the fully randomized NT-650 screen. Labeled example drugs represent anchor
points across the phenotypic landscape. Dot color changes by phenotype strength
asdetermined by a separate random forest classiﬁer employed earlier in the dataset
construction process (“Methods”). A UMAP on correlation distances of the same
data (Supplementary Fig. S3) fails to form meaningful phenotypic clusters. Source
data are provided in the Source Data File.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54375-y
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:9955 
6
known compound in the NT-650 set against every compound in the
DIVERSet library. Figure 5a shows an example of the top 5 compounds
matching ﬂuoxetine’s phenotype. Evaluating performance in this
context was challenging, as the diverse drug-like compounds lack
known bioactivity ground-truth labels.
As one means of assessment, we use an established systems
pharmacology tool, the similarity ensemble approach (SEA25), to
predict MOAs for all DIVERSet compounds from their chemical
structures alone and compare these predictions against the estab-
lished MOAs of NT-650 compounds that were their closest neigh-
bors in the learned distance-metric space (see “Methods”). While
SEA predictions are not perfect, they illuminate an otherwise dark
MOA landscape of chemical matter. In a “phenosearch” approach,
we rank-order and select the top 500 DIVERSet compounds by
phenotypic distance to each known drug using correlation distance
versus the Twin-NN models.
Fig. 5 | Learned distance is a good proxy for the target bioactivity proﬁle of
DIVERSet compounds. Assessed in a scaffold-agnostic screening paradigm, we
compare motion index (MI) traces of NT-650 query compounds against a screened
library of diverse compounds (Chembridge DIVERSet) using the Twin-NN learned
distance and correlation distance versus a random baseline wherein the matched
traces are randomly selected. a As an example, the ﬂuoxetine MI trace (purple)
from the NT-650 agrees well with the top 5 matched library compound traces (gold)
ranked by Twin-NN distance. All time series in this plot are scaled to the minimum
and maximum of the dataset (0 and 6750 MI units, respectively), and the y-axis is
plotted on this normalized 0 to 1 scale. b We use a separate chemical informatics
method, the Similarity Ensemble Approach (SEA25,26), to assess the library com-
pound hits. Ranked by the similarity of their phenotypes to drugs from the NT-650
screen, we would expect that the likelihood of SEA target proﬁles between a query
(NT-650) and its closest-match library (DIVERSet) compounds will increase with the
quality of the phenotypic distance metric. “Hits” (y-axis) are the number of
DIVERSet compounds in a given sample that match their separate SEA proﬁles.
“Sample” (x-axis) is the percentage of the DIVERSet library examined, where the
analysis is limited to the top 500 matches from the library. The learned distance
metric enriches for SEA hits better than correlation and the random baseline across
the entire range of the screen. The plot uses a conﬁdence interval of 95% via the
seaborn lineplot function. c Similar to (b); but for speciﬁc NT-650 compounds
selected by phenotypic strength (see “Methods”). Learned distance outperforms
correlation and random distance, as with pindolol, imetit, and chlorpromazine.
Correlation distance has signiﬁcantly better enrichment for only one NT-650
compound, MDL 72832 (4th row, 4th column in grid plot). All subplots use a con-
ﬁdence interval of 95% via the seaborn lineplot function. Source data are provided
in the Source Data File.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54375-y
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:9955 
7
We observe a striking enrichment for known-target MOAs for the
Twin-NN distance over correlation distance (Fig. 5b, d) based on the
phenotypic associations for these diverse drug-like compounds. Twin-
NN identiﬁes more DIVERSet compounds with similar MoAs to the
drug queries than correlation distance (Fig. 5b). Unexpectedly, ran-
dom selection (as a null hypothesis; Fig. 5b, violet line) typically out-
performs
correlation
distance
at
identifying
shared
MOAs,
highlighting the limitations of correlation distance as a metric for time-
series data such as MI. We also compare distance metrics by examining
how often negative control wells match up with known drugs. With
correlation distance, negative controls frequently rank in the top-500
“phenosearch” list for known drugs, but not by Twin-NN distance
(Supplementary Fig. 4a, b). These ﬁndings suggest that the Twin-NNs
are more effective than correlation distance at discovering DIVERSet
compounds that induce similar phenotypes to known drugs and
improve scaffold-hopping and neuroactive drug discovery for diverse
drug-like chemical matter.
We also asked how the phenotypic space of the DIVERSet com-
pares to the NT-650. We computed a combined UMAP (all compounds
from NT-650 combined with DIVERSet), colored by the dataset the
compounds came from (Supplementary Fig. 17). Strikingly, there is a
large overlap between the blue (NT-650) and orange (DIVERSet)
compounds, considering that the models were not trained on
DIVERSet data. Despite this out-of-domain setting, on new compounds
and behavioral data, the models usefully associate drug-like com-
pounds from the DIVERSet with known compounds in the NT-650 set.
This overlap supports the “phenosearch” approach, as most NT-650
query compounds have many phenotypically-similar DIVERSet com-
pound neighbors in the map. Some regions have a higher density of
NT-650 compounds and vice-versa, suggesting behaviors more com-
monly appear on one screen versus the other. Further studies might
focus on selected sub-regions with DIVERSet density higher than
NT650 to explore phenotypic space unexplored in the NT-650 phe-
notypic screen.
Experimental validation of learned-distance metric in ﬁnding
diverse drug-like compounds with shared pharmacology
Since the Twin NN models consistently enriched for predicted MOAs
of DIVERSet compounds shared with known compounds (Fig. 5b), we
sought to experimentally test these learned-distance predictions pro-
spectively in a scaffold-hopping drug-discovery scenario. We selected
12 neuroactive drugs from diverse regions in the behaviorome UMAP
(Fig. 4a). We purchased the top 5 DIVERSet compounds ranked by
Twin-NN distance for each drug (60 compounds in total, of generally
low Tanimoto similarity to their query drug; Supplementary Fig. 15).
We hypothesized that the DIVERSet compounds acted through the
same protein targets as those known for the drugs that the DIVERSet
compounds mimicked phenotypically.
This was a straightforward logic in some cases: for example,
IMETIT is a human Histamine H3 agonist with activity at Histamine H4
51.
We purchase and test the ﬁve DIVERSet compounds most closely
ranked by the Twin-NN distance for direct binding to human Histamine
H3 and H4, discovering binding of three of those compounds to H3, at
1.1 µM, 0.99 µM, and 2.7 µM (binding afﬁnity Ki), and one of them to H4
at 5.4 µM (Ki) (Fig. 6c). In other cases, the choice of test targets was
more complex, such as for the tricyclic antidepressant clomipramine,
an inhibitor of serotonin and norepinephrine transporters with addi-
tional activity against other GPCRs, including serotonergic, dopami-
nergic, adrenergic, and histaminergic receptors. Furthermore, a
compound’s most potent activity in humans may not always account
for its observed behavior in zebraﬁsh. Off-target or side activities
might cause the most pronounced response in the ﬁsh; this is an
inherent limitation in the cross-organism study’s design for poly-
pharmacological drugs. Clomipramine’s phenotypic location being
closer to chlorpromazine than to the SSRIs ﬂuoxetine and paroxetine
in the behaviorome (Fig. 4a), illustrates one such case. In humans, the
clinical timescales involved in serotonin reuptake for behavioral
modiﬁcation are much longer52 than the 1 h treatment duration used in
our phenotypic screening, so we reasoned that the DIVERSet com-
pounds phenomatched with ﬂuoxetine might have acted through a
subset of the targets it shares with chlorpromazine, such as serotonin
2B (5-HT2B)53,54. Accordingly, two of clomipramine’s top 5 pheno-
matched DIVERSet compounds achieve afﬁnity (Ki) of 33 nM and
1.9 µM Kis at 5-HT2B in prospective testing (Fig. 6c).
We test 216 new compound-target pairs based on 60 unique
compounds and 17 unique protein targets. Of these, 8.3% are active
at 10 µM or better Ki (Fig. 6a, b and Supplementary Table 2). IMETIT
has the highest hit rate; 3 of its top 5 DIVERSet compounds have at
least 50% inhibition at 10 µM or better against at least one of the
targets; in the dose-response assays, two yields Ki < 10 µM, and the
most potent, compound 58040, has a Ki = 0.99 µM for Histamine H3.
Overall, 7 of the 12 drug queries yield at least one DIVERSet hit for a
58% per-query hit rate; this corresponded to a 22% hit rate on a per-
compound basis. All the dose-response binding curves from the
secondary
assays
for
the
hits
are
provided
(Supplementary
Figs. 5–13). Where the tests failed, we may have picked the wrong
subset of a query drug’s protein targets to test against its DIVERSet
compounds. For instance, clomipramine has known activities at a
substantially wider range of targets than we could empirically test
within the scope of this study, and this may account for mechanisms
of action for those of its DIVERSet compounds that did not bind
to 5-HT2B.
Learned phenotypic distances enable chemical scaffold hopping
Despite strikingly different chemical structures, the learned distance
metric identiﬁed compounds that induced a similar behavioral phe-
notype in the case studies. We explored this idea further by comparing
ECFP455 (chemical ﬁngerprint Tanimoto distance) versus Twin-NN
phenotypic distance for all possible combinations of two drugs from
the randomized highly-replicated library used for training (Fig. 7). Here
we deﬁne four quadrants: top-left (low Tanimoto distance, high Twin-
NN distance), top-right (high Tanimoto and high Twin-NN), bottom-
left (low Tanimoto and low Twin-NN), and bottom-right (high Tani-
moto and low Twin-NN). Of potential interest in drug discovery efforts,
the bottom-right region (dark purple) highlights where the commonly
used cheminformatic means of comparing two molecules fail, but the
Twin-NN distance succeeds.
Tanimoto chemical-structure distance does not correlate with
phenotypic distance, except for isolated cases in the lower left (Fig. 7).
Most pairs have Tanimoto chemical-structure distances greater than
0.4, despite sometimes inducing similar phenotypes through puta-
tively shared MOAs. Dot size reﬂects observed MOA similarity, com-
puted as a separate Tanimoto distance between the vectors of known-
target activities for the two drugs derived from the ChEMBL 23 phar-
macology database51, “Methods”). The highest concentration of high-
target-similarity compound pairs (large dots) favors regions where
phenotypic distance is low, and chemical structure distance is average
(0.3–0.7). This enrichment of known-MOA matches in the presence of
good (low) Twin-NN phenotypic distance pairs is consistent with
learned phenotypic distance predicting shared biological mechanisms.
We hone in on these known-drug pairs with several thresholds (> 0.2
ChEMBL target-activity similarity, a chemical-structure distance > 0.5,
and a Twin-NN phenotypic distance < 0.3), which yields 51 known-drug
pairs that we rank by biological target similarity (full table provided in
Supplementary Table 3). We note that there are two seemingly iden-
tical rows in the table for Clozapine with Chlorpromazine since there
were two unique occurrences of Clozapine in the NT-650 plates pro-
vided by the supplier. The drugs in the top pair (7-OH-DPAT and
ropinirole) are potent Dopamine D3 agonizts and antiparkinsonian
agents. Thus our Twin-NN phenotypic distance associates known
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54375-y
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:9955 
8
drugs with a shared mechanism of action but high chemical structure
distance, highlighting its usefulness for scaffold hopping.
On the other hand, some pairs of drugs with high phenotypic
similarity and middling structural similarity lack shared MOAs (small
dots), which suggests these drugs induce similar phenotypic effects in
larval zebraﬁsh through different, parallel, or unstudied MOAs. These
pairs correspond to a region of the known drug space of particular
interest for drug discovery, and further studies might explore why
these pairs of known drugs are linked phenotypically in our study
through potentially underexplored mechanisms.
Discussion
Deep metric learning models trained on high-replicate phenotypic
larval zebraﬁsh screens identify pairs of drug-like compounds despite
experimental variability, group human drugs based on zebraﬁsh effect,
ﬁnd connections among compounds that traditional chemical data
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54375-y
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:9955 
9
analyses fail to make, and group structurally distinct compounds by
biological MOAs. These observations support using metric learning on
large phenotypic screening datasets for drug discovery and scaffold
hopping. Moreover, our ﬁrst implementation of these complex
learned-distance models fell prey to shortcut learning41, wherein they
exploited experimental artifacts in the screening dataset to achieve
misleadingly high performance that did not generalize to similar but
independent zebraﬁsh screens. This deep mis-learning was nuanced
and eluded conventional cross-validation, soundness checks, and
exploratory data analysis tests. We believe the strategies described
here to detect, correct, and stress-test the experimental screening
datasets and revised models will ﬁnd use in other studies that combine
complex biological data with deep learning models.
Straightforward measurement methods like correlation, Eucli-
dean, or dynamic time-warping distance fall short when identifying
drugs whose replicates induced perceptible but subtle changes in
zebraﬁsh behavior (Fig. 3a, b). The main issue is that these methods
cannot differentiate between irrelevant random variations and mean-
ingful changes that illuminate the underlying pharmacology. Con-
ventional metrics take all time points into account without weighting
their importance. On the other hand, contrastive metric learning
models disregard irrelevant parts of the data (features) and con-
centrate on the segments that display signiﬁcant behavioral differ-
ences. For instance, clozapine- and DMSO-treated zebraﬁsh exhibit
periods of reduced motion (Fig. 1d, time points 600–700). Clozapine
can look like a negative control by standard correlation methods,
Fig. 6 | Prospective experimental validation against human receptors in vitro.
Using a cheminformatic protein target prediction approach (SEA25,26) with the Twin-
NN phenotypic distance, we make the mechanism of action predictions for NT-650
compounds and test them experimentally by radioligand binding assays. a Left:
Top 5 DIVERSet compounds (represented by their motion index time-series, rows
2–6, gold) matched by Twin-NN distance to the NT-650 drug Imetit (top row,
purple). Right: Diagram of this “phenoblast” approach. NT-650 drugs are columns.
DIVERSet compounds are rows, ordered by Twin-NN phenotypic distance. Sup-
plemental Table 1 maps compound IDs to supplier IDs. All time series in this plot are
scaled to the minimum and maximum of the dataset (0 and 6750 MI units,
respectively), and the y-axis is plotted on this normalized 0 to 1 scale. b Primary
radioligand binding assays (binding inhibition at 10 µM, %) for 7 known drugs. The
heatmap shows 5 DIVERSet compounds selected for testing (rows), with the SEA-
predicted human protein targets as columns. c Same as (b) for secondary assays
(dose-response radioligand binding experiments). d Representative dose-response
curves from (c) for selected DIVERSet compounds tested against two human tar-
gets: the histamine H3 receptor (left) and the 5-hydroxytryptamine 2B receptor
(right). Results (mean ± SEM) from a minimum of 3 independent assays (each in
triplicate) were normalized, pooled, and ﬁtted to the built-in one-site competition
binding function in the GraphPad Prism V10.Source data are provided in the Source
Data File.
ChEMBL 
Target Profile 
Similarity
Time (seconds)
MI Scaled
Time (seconds)
MI Scaled
MI Scaled
Time (seconds)
Time (seconds)
MI Scaled
Clozapine
WB 4101 HCl
SIB 1757
BD 1047 2HBr
BD 1063 2HCl
Yohimbine HCl
Bromocriptine 
Mesylate
BD 1047 2HBr
Tanimoto Distance
Phenotypic Distance
Fig. 7 | Phenotypic screening with learned distance reveals scaffold hopping
and drug prospecting opportunities. Learned phenotypic distance (Twin-NN,
y-axis) complements conventional chemical informatic distance based on chemical
structure (Tanimoto coefﬁcient on ECFP4 circular ﬁngerprints, x-axis). The scat-
terplot contains all pairwise combinations of 83 NT-650 compounds (each pair is a
dot), calculated from their average MI traces and chemical structures. Where the
phenotypic distance is low (< 0.3) but the Tanimoto distance is average or high
(> 0.4), molecular structure dissimilarity misses neuroactive similarity. We illustrate
each quadrant with examples. Bottom left: low Tanimoto and phenotypic distance
(both metrics agree that molecules are similar). Bottom right: low phenotypic
distance and high Tanimoto distance (scaffold hopping opportunity). Top-left: low
Tanimoto distance, but high phenotypic distance (classic “activity cliff”: disparate
activity despite high structural similarity). Top right: high Tanimoto and pheno-
typic distances (both metrics agree that molecules are unrelated). Dot size reﬂects
the Tanimoto similarity between the target proﬁles (as binary vectors) of the
compound pairs. All time series in this plot are scaled to the minimum and max-
imum of the dataset (0 and 6750 MI units, respectively), and the y-axis is plotted on
this normalized 0 to 1 scale. Source data are provided in the Source Data File.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-54375-y
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:9955 
10
which attribute equal importance to periods of inactivity and activity.
In an extreme example, correlation distance scores two traces as
almost identical when comparing a drug that sedates the ﬁsh except
for a sudden movement spike versus a lethal control such as eugenol.
However, a metric learning model learns that sudden motion spikes
matter in differentiating drugs.
At a more global level, we construct a “behaviorome” - a visual
map of drug similarity based on zebraﬁsh behavior. This landscape,
created by pairing zebraﬁsh phenotype with an appropriate distance
metric, reveals relationships between known neuroactive drugs and
identiﬁes underexplored areas with potential for drug discovery. From
high-throughput behavioral screening data and the learned distance
metric, we link human drugs directly to the in vivo vertebrate beha-
viors they induce. Classical informatic methods falter on diverse che-
mical structures, as they rely on the necessity of the similar property
principle of chemical informatics56. This is particularly true at activity
cliffs57, where slight chemical structure changes drastically affect
bioactivity. Phenotypic screening, using behavior, circumvents these
limitations. Different compounds triggering similar zebraﬁsh beha-
viors may interact with the same targets and pathways. The learned
distance metric complements raw structural similarity (Fig. 7), under-
lining traditional cheminformatics limitations and opportunities for
drug discovery and scaffold hopping.
We attempted to automate the discovery of diverse drug-like hits
for disease-related mechanisms and pathways in the CNS. For new
compounds, such as those from the Chembridge DIVERSet library, the
Similarity Ensemble Approach25,26,57 predicted unknown experimental
MOAs. The metric learning models identiﬁed library compounds with
marked enrichment in their predicted MOAs to the MOAs of known
drugs, indicating pharmacological similarities (Fig. 5b, d). Instead of
relying on in silico validation, we experimentally tested the predicted
MOAs in vitro via prospective radio-ligand binding assays. We found
that neuroactive drugs successfully linked to DIVERSet library com-
pounds by phenotype and MOA 58% of the time. This hit rate sur-
passed early drug discovery hit rates using high throughput screening
(HTS, 0.01–0.14%) or virtual screening (VS, 1–40%)58. Unlike typical
HTS or VS hits, behavioral hits may offer more robust lead series
starting points because they, by deﬁnition, already trigger an in vivo
effect in zebraﬁsh and show animal tolerance. Many in vitro hits fail
in vivo due to absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion (ADME)
issues, and pharmacodynamic/kinetic properties such as blood-brain
barrier penetration are crucial for neuroactive drugs. However, deep
metric learning on behavioral screening data quickly identiﬁed hits
that could circumvent these issues.
In an unintended but instructive project outcome, we grappled
with the ﬁrst metric learning models silently exploiting shortcut
learning on the original dataset, which had not used randomized plate
layouts. Despite passing conventional soundness check analyses,
including label randomization and scrambling input features (y- and x-
scrambling), the learning models exploited subtle experimental data-
set artifacts. Pre-determined plate layouts from drug suppliers might
inadvertently teach the models positional effects by exploiting slight
irregularities in the experimental setup, such as minor differences in
distance to directional light and sound sources (Fig. 1a). These effects,
imprinted in high-frequency components of time-series traces, were
imperceptible to humans but perceptible to deep learning models.
This generalizability limitation was not an overﬁtting issue and could
not be rectiﬁed by reﬁning training-test set splits, such as scaffold-
splitting drugs or time-series trace clustering. Consequently, we re-ran
the full-scale experimental screen with robotically randomized plate
layouts on the same compound library to assess this challenge
unequivocally. Indeed, models trained on the original dataset dete-
riorated when we computationally smoothed high-frequency compo-
nents of the motion index traces (Fig. 2b), but those trained on the ﬁt-
to-purpose randomized screen remained unaffected (Fig. 3b). While
we might instead have attempted to train generative adversarial net-
works (GANs)59 to remove shortcut signals computationally60, complex
models such as GANs can be brittle, and we sought a more deﬁnitive
analysis. As an intriguing challenge, follow-up studies by those inter-
ested in mitigating shortcut learning might ﬁnd value in comparing
new algorithmic versus the experimental plate-effect removal strate-
gies on the