communications biology
Article
A Nature Portfolio journal
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08044-5
Label-free evaluation of mouse embryo
quality using time-lapse bright ﬁeld and
optical coherence microscopy
Check for updates
Fei Wang
1, Senyue Hao
2, Kibeom Park1, Ali Ahmady3 & Chao Zhou
1,2
The selection of high-quality embryos is essential to enhance the implantation rate for in vitro fertilization
(IVF). Optical coherence microscopy (OCM) can noninvasively provide three-dimensional (3D) high-
resolutionimagingofdevelopingembryos. Therevealedmicrostructurescanbeusedforaccurateembryo
evaluation.Here,weacquiretime-lapse3D OCMimageswithco-registeredbright-ﬁeldimagingonmouse
embryo development from the one-cell stage to the fully hatched blastocyst inside an incubator. Our
results demonstrate the capability of OCM to detect structural features of the developing embryos. The
second and third embryonic cell cycles are indicated to be associated with blastocyst formation and the
hatching capability. OCM-based time-lapse technology holds the potential to enrich early embryo
development insights and streamline embryo selection within IVF clinics.
Infertility affects about 17.5% of people worldwide in their lifetime, with
variations based on region and methodology1,2. Since 1978, in vitro fertili-
zation (IVF) has been the primary method used in Assisted Reproductive
Technology (ART), which accounted for 2.3% of all births in the United
States in 20213–5. However, ART cycles yieldeda live birth rate of only 37.3%
in 2021 nationwide4. Optimizing IVF procedures improves success rates
amidst uncontrollable patient-related complexities. A typical procedure
involves egg retrieval, fertilization, embryo culture, and embryo transfer6,7.
Initially, embryos were transferred between day 1 and day 3, with some not
progressing further8. Therefore, multiple embryo transfer is often required
to enhance the success rate at a high risk of multiple pregnancies4, which
negatively affects mothers and fetuses9. Advancements in culture protocol
and embryo evaluation have led to the proposal of single embryo transfer as
an ideal solution10,11. Extended culture until blastocyst and pre-transfer
embryo selection are widely used nowadays to select embryos with optimal
reproductive potential12,13. Alongside the efforts to improve the protocols,
there is a growing focus on developing effective evaluation methods to
enhance the IVF success rate.
The standard methods for selecting embryos include morphological
evaluation, preimplantation genetic testing (PGT), and time-lapse
imaging14,15. Assessing embryo morphology has been the traditional
method for evaluating development and selecting embryos based on
microscopic images on static time points13,14,16,17. Several concerns were
raised regarding the subjective evaluation by embryologists and the
potential impact of suboptimal culture conditions caused by the need to
remove embryos from the incubator for imaging. Furthermore, their basis
on a morphology snapshot does not fully capture the dynamic events of
embryos during the preimplantation period, which makes it challenging to
correlate with viability18. As a supplement, PGT methods directly link
genetic abnormalities to embryo quality by biopsy of the trophectoderm or
cells from earlier stages19–21. The signiﬁcant limitations of PGT include the
invasiveness that may affect the IVF outcome22.
On the other hand, time-lapse imaging allows for continuous mon-
itoring of embryo development at frequent intervals, ranging from minutes
to hours23–26. Most of the time-lapse imaging acquired two-dimensional
(2D) bright-ﬁeld (BF) or dark ﬁeld images at multiple depths under
environmental control14. Various predictive parameters and models based
on developmental kinetics have been established over ten years. However,
the effectiveness of this technology in improving live birth rates and pro-
vidingclinicalbeneﬁtsisstillto be determined27.Onepotentialdevelopment
direction is to employ a three-dimensional (3D) noninvasive imaging
modality for time-lapse imaging to provide comprehensive information on
the developing embryos.
Opticalcoherencemicroscopy(OCM)isahigh-resolution,volumetric,
noninvasive imaging technique that combines the principles of optical
coherence tomography (OCT) and confocal microscopy28,29. With a high
numerical aperture objective lens, OCM provides micron-level resolutions
that can resolve the embryos’ cellular or even subcellular features. Previous
studies have shown that OCM is capable of 4D live imaging of early
mammalian embryos30, and OCT-captured structural data of bovine
embryos of the trophectoderm and zona pellucida showed the potential to
predict their hatchability and quality after IVF31. Recently, researchers used
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, Saint Louis, MO, USA. 2Department of Electrical & Systems Engineering, Washington
University in St. Louis, Saint Louis, MO, USA. 3Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Washington University in St. Louis, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
e-mail: chaozhou@wustl.edu
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:612 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
OCM to visualize the number of cells in compacted mouse embryos at
embryonic Day 3 (E3.0), indicating its strong correlation with embryo
quality and developmental potential32. As a label-free, noninvasive, and
high-resolution imaging modality, OCM has been recognized as a powerful
tool for the 3D structural assessment of mammalian embryos.
In this study, we aimed to establish time-lapse 3D OCM imaging as a
unique platform for noninvasive embryo evaluation. We used mouse
embryos sincethey serve as an appropriate model for exhibiting genetic and
developmental similarity with humans33–35. To ensure appropriate envir-
onmental control, where factors such as temperature36, oxygen level37,38, and
relative humidity39,40 are crucial for embryo development, we developed a
compact and integrated OCM and BF imaging system that ﬁts within a
commercial incubator. Time-lapse dual-modality images of the mouse
embryos were acquired about every ten minutes for over 150 h. These
revealed 3D morphological features from the early to the blastocyst stages
and allowed accurate grading of blastocysts. The time-lapse approach
provided insights into morphokinetic properties throughout the embryo
development process, establishing a correlation between early cell events
and the formation and quality of blastocysts. Assessing blastocyst formation
and quality can improve success rates in IVF by selecting high-quality
embryos for transfer, potentially leading to higher pregnancy rates41. We
observed that the timing of the second and the third embryonic cycles
correlate with the blastocyst formation.
Results
Development of the dual-modality imaging system and experi-
mental procedures
We designed and constructed a dual-modality imaging system that com-
bines a BF and an OCM system to provide high-resolution and high-
throughput imaging capabilities. To perform longitudinal time-lapse
imagingonliveembryos,wecustomizedthesamplearmoftheOCMsystem
and the BF imaging system to have a compact phototype that ﬁts inside an
incubator (Heracell™VIOS 160i), as shown in Fig. 1A, to ensure an
appropriate culture condition with 5% O2 and 6% CO2. OCM can provide
not only comparable information to BF but also additional 3D insights.
Using a broadband superluminescent diode and a 20X objective lens, we
achieved axial and lateral resolutions at ~2.1 μm and ~1.0 μm in tissue,
respectively. A commercial embryo imaging dish (Fig. 1B, IVF store
V005001)extendedthecapabilitytocultureandimageupto25embryosper
dish. To enable efﬁcient and precise sample movement, a 3-axis motorized
sample stage was incorporated.
To study the dynamic events during embryo development, we aimed
to monitor the embryos from the one-cell stage to fully hatched blas-
tocysts for over 150 h every ten minutes (Fig. 1C). Due to the dense data
points, we implemented an automated acquisition pipeline, illustrated in
Fig. 1D. For each sample, we automatically moved the well to the imaging
location using two steps: prior knowledge of the sample index and
location of the well, followed by image-guided auto-tracking and auto-
focusing to center the embryo samples. Co-registered BF and 3D OCM
images were then acquired. Typically, we cultured and monitored 8–12
embryos per dish. The data were transferred to a storage server for
further analysis.
Time-lapse OCM reveals three-dimensional embryo micro-
structures at different developmental stages
We demonstrate the capability of monitoring mouse embryos during the
preimplantation stages. During the development of the embryos, a series of
dynamic processes occur, including cleavage divisions, compaction, blas-
tocyst formation, and hatching from the zona pellucida. Figures 2, 3 and
Supplementary Movie 1 illustrate developmental events in the same mouse
Fig. 1 | System Scheme and Workﬂow. A Simpliﬁed
OCM + BF system schematic demonstration. M1-
M3: mirrors, L1-6: lenses, DM: dichromic mirror,
DC: dispersion compensation, C: collimators, GM:
Galvo mirrors, OL: objective lens, EF: Emission ﬁl-
ter, CM: camera, LED: light emitting diode.
B Schematic representation of imaging dish.
C Imaging protocol. The imaging timeline starts
from the 1-cell stage and ends when the embryos
stop developing or are fully hatched, which covers
the most crucial events in the early embryo stages.
D Pipeline of imaging acquisition on one sample.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08044-5
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:612 
2
embryo,whereOCMcomplementsBFimagesbyproviding3Dinformation
for visualizing and characterizing morphological features.
At the early stages, before the blastocyst formation, OCM imaging
demonstrated the presence of individual cells exhibiting distinct morphol-
ogy and organization, as shown in Fig. 2. BF images (Fig. 2A) provided a
clear visualization of the cell count and zona pellucida but did not distinctly
show the nuclei. The projected OCM images through the entire depth
(Fig. 2B) exhibit features comparable to those of BF. In addition, OCM
providesclearvisualizationof the nuclei, includingtheirsizeand location,as
showcased in the selected en face slices (Fig. 2C), cross-sectional views
(Fig. 2D), and 3D rendering (Fig. 2E). From the 1-cell to 8-cell stage, the
nuclei showed strong contrast against the cytoplasm in the OCM images,
allowing accurate identiﬁcation of cleavage and quantifying symmetry.
Starting from the compaction process, the cells developed less distinct
boundaries with increaseddensity,makingit hard to differentiate individual
cells. Additionally, the thickness and uniformity of the zona pellucida can be
visualized by 3D OCM.
During the blastocyst stage, the embryos start to differentiate and form
a blastocoel. The inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE) were
derived into distinct cell lineages as the embryo expanded at the blastocyst
stage, as demonstrated in Fig. 3. According to the established Garnder
grading system42, the blastocysts were assigned stages 1–6 based on their
expansion state. In expansion grade 1, the embryos initiate the cavitation,
and the blastocoel remains less than half the total volume. In this stage, ICM
and TE are not visible in BF (Fig. 3A) and OCM (Fig. 3B–E) images due to
their immaturity (Supplementary Movie 2). The OCM projections
(Fig. 3C, D) reveal the initiation of cavities that will eventually develop into
the blastocoel. These cavities are depicted as three separate chambers, as
indicated by the green arrows, which are not easily identiﬁable in BF
(Fig. 3A). Expansion grade 2 is the intermediate state where the blastocoel
exceeds half of the embryo. The cavitation propagates from the bottom of
the embryo and pushes clusters of ICM-like cells together toward the top, as
showninthe OCMimages(Fig.3C–E). Embryos witha ﬁlledblastocoeland
ahalf-thinnedzonapellucida areclassiﬁedasexpansiongrade3.Duringthis
period, the early indications of the ICM and TE became apparent. Starting
fromexpansiongrade 4, the blastocoel expands to be larger than the original
embryo with the thinnest zona pellucida. In the BF images (Fig. 3A), the
ICM was not clearly distinguishable, while in the OCM images (Fig. 3C–E),
a dense and compact cluster of cells could be observed. Expansion grade 5
corresponds to a hatching blastocyst with visible ICM and TE as hatching
from the zona pellucida begins. By utilizing OCM images (Supplementary
Movies 2–7), we can effectively characterize the blastocoel cavity, ICM, and
the hatching site. Expansion grade 6 represents the hatched blastocyst when
TE ultimately bursts through the zona pellucida.
Time-lapse OCM tracks the localization of pronuclei, nuclei, and
hatching sites
All mouse embryos exhibited two pronuclei during the ﬁrst occurrence of
OCM imaging after thawing. Figure 4A displays the OCM imaging at the
ﬁrst recording. It allows quantiﬁcation of the pronuclei size and separation
distance. Additionally, OCM allows for tracking pronuclei movement over
time and capturing their fusion, which is essential for quality control. In
Fig. 4B, male and female pronuclei fusion was observed within 53 min. Two
intermediate stages at 75 and 85 min indicated the division initiation as
spindle pole elongation occurred. Prior to the reformation of nuclei in each
daughter blastomere, the OCM imaging displayed low contrast, as depicted
in Fig. 4B, at 106 min. Once nuclei formed, their locations were observed
toward the edge of the blastomere, with the most signiﬁcant separation
noted at 127 min. Two imagesat different depths were presented to account
for the embryo’s self-rotation, which causes the nuclei to not align in the
same z-plane. Other dynamic events, such as compaction, expansion, and
re-expansion of the blastocysts, canbe visualized in the time-lapse videos.In
addition to Supplementary Movie 1, Supplementary Movie 8 gives another
example of a hatching blastocyst,revealing that two blastomeres at the 8-cell
stage did not contribute to the blastocyst formation. In contrast, Supple-
mentary Movie 9 illustrates an example where the embryo collapses before
forming a blastocyst. When carefully observed, these events enable
embryologists to detect abnormalities in earlier developmental stages.
To further explore the capabilities of OCM, we investigated the 8-cell
stage, aiming to visualize not only the nuclei but also the cell polarity.
Fig. 2 | Time-lapse 3D OCM and bright-ﬁeld
imaging of a developing mouse embryo during the
pre-blastocyst stages. The top row (A) features
standard bright-ﬁeld images, while the second (B),
third (C), fourth (D), and bottom (E) rows display
the en face full-depth projection, en face slice pro-
jection, cross-sectional view, and 3D rendering,
respectively, derived from OCM images. Each col-
umn of images corresponds to the same imaging
time point, providing a comprehensive view of the
embryo’s development. Red arrows point to the cell
nuclei, highlighting the individual cells within the
developing embryo. Lavender arrows denote the
zona pellucida, a glycoprotein layer surrounding the
embryo, which plays a crucial role in fertilization
and early development. Red spots denote nuclei in
the 3D rendering. Scale bar: 20 μm.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08044-5
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:612 
3
Figure 4C shows the OCM images at different depths, with nuclei and
blastomeres labeled in numbers. To infer the polarity, we segmented the
nuclei and visualized the positioning and orientation of the nuclei at
the 8-cell stage. By analyzing the relative positions of the nuclei within the
blastomeres, we can identify patterns that indicate the presence of polarity.
For instance, nuclei 5 and 7 were biased toward the outer side of the blas-
tomeres,whichsuggeststheexistenceofpolaritywithinthecells.Incontrast,
nuclei 1, 2, and 6 laif in the center of their blastomeres and did not exhibit
preferential alignment. Supplementary Movie 10 presents a visualization of
individual blastomeres with their nuclei segmented in 3D. This approach
provides a simple and accessible method to assess cell polarity during the
8-cell stage by detecting nuclei’s spatial distribution and arrangement.
The concept of the hatching site, deﬁned as the initial trophectoderm
(TE)cellrelativetothelocationoftheinnercellmass(ICM)cluster,hasbeen
proposed as a signiﬁcant factor in mice pregnancy outcomes43. Figure 4D
presents a visual representation of the deﬁned hatching sites (A-site: 1–2
o’clock,B-site:3–4o’clock,C-site:4–5o’clock,andD-site:5–6o’clock)using
OCM projection and 3D segmentation of hatching blastocysts. The A-site
examples were more prevalent than the C- and D-sites, with limited
examples indicating a preference for hatching at the A-site. Additionally,
abnormal cases were observed where two hatching sites were present,
suggesting variations in hatching patterns. While there are few examples of
blastocysts with well-formed ICM, the study demonstrates the capability to
determine the location of the hatching site precisely.
The timing between the cell events indicates the blastocyst
quality
To investigate the factors contributing to blastocyst formation, we
hypothesized that the timing of key developmental events is vital to the
process. Figure 5A deﬁnes the morphokinetic parameters and calculated
variables.
In addition to the blastocyst quality, we conducted a similar analysis to
examine the capacity for blastocyst formation and the correlation between
timing. In our experiments, the embryos failed to develop into blastocysts as
theyceasedprogressing before reaching the eight-cell stage,despite showing
some signs of compaction in speciﬁc embryos. Supplementary Movie 9
showcasesanexample of anembryo displaying atypicalbehavior,ultimately
failing to reach the blastocyst stage. Hence, we investigated the early embryo
cell cycle variables ECC2 and cc2a, as well as the synchronization of cell
division denoted by S2.
ECC2 measured the second embryo cycle by subtracting the time of
the ﬁrst occurrence of four cells from that of two cells. In Fig. 5C, the
average duration of ECC2 in the blastocyst group was observed to be
signiﬁcantly longer compared to the group that did not form blastocysts.
Likewise, Fig. 5D illustrates a correlation between the longer duration of
cc2a and the formation of blastocysts. The term cc2a refers to the ﬁrst
blastomere ‘a’ cell cycle, which is determined by the time it takes for one
of the two blastomeres in the 2-cell stage to divide. As the subtraction of
cc2a from ECC2, S2 does not show signiﬁcant differences between
blastocysts and non-blastocysts groups (Fig. 5E). Our results suggested
that providing sufﬁcient time for the competence of the second cell cycle,
particularly in the ﬁrst blastomere ‘a’, may be associated with the suc-
cessful development of blastocysts.
Using BF and OCM images, we performed morphological grading on
the embryos that developed into blastocysts based on the Gardner grading
system42. The embryos were sorted into the ‘Good’ and ‘Poor’ categories for
maximum expansion grade, ICM, and TE quality, respectively. We con-
solidated the three categories (A, B, and C) in the Gardner system into two
based on the fact that only the well-looking embryos were transferred for
implantation in clinics44.
We determined whether the timing of the early cell cycles and syn-
chronization correlates to the blastocyst quality. Figure 5F demonstrates
Fig. 3 | Time-lapse 3D OCM and bright-ﬁeld
imaging of a developing mouse embryo during the
blastocyst stages. The top row (A) features standard
bright-ﬁeld images, while the second (B), third (C),
fourth (D), and bottom (E) rows display the en face
full-depth projection, en face slice projection, cross-
sectional view, and 3D rendering, respectively,
derived from OCM images. Each column of images
corresponds to the same imaging time point, pro-
viding a comprehensive view of the embryo’s
development. Green arrows indicate the formation
of cavities. Yellow arrows indicate the formation of
the inner cell mass (ICM), a critical structure that
gives rise to the embryo’s tissues and organs, whose
morphology matters in development. Blue arrows
represent the hatching site, indicating the embryo
has reached a crucial developmental milestone and
is ready to implant. In the 3D rendering, dark purple
shading indicates the location of cavities, and red
parts stand for the ICM. Scale bar: 20 μm.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08044-5
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:612 
4
that the duration of ECC2 is signiﬁcantly longer in hatched embryos
compared to the embryos that collapsed before hatching. In addition, the
duration of ECC2 does not affect the grades of ICM and TE. Similar to
ECC2, only the hatched embryos exhibit a longer cc2a compared to the
embryos that did not hatch, while cc2a duration does not have an effect on
the grades of ICM and TE, as shown in Fig. 5G. The third embryo cell cycle
was deﬁned as ECC3, which measures the timing between the initial
occurrence of the eight cells and the ﬁrst evidence of four-cell appearance.
Figure 5H shows the difference in ECC3 between hatched and unhatched
embryos, with no signiﬁcant difference observed in the ICM or TE grades.
However, contrary to ECC2, the timing of ECC3 is shorter in hatched
embryos. S2 and S3 denote the synchronization of cell divisions (t4-t3) and
cleavage patterns (t8-t5), respectively. No signiﬁcant differences are
observed in groups withdifferent grades, as depicted in Fig. 5I. Note that the
number of samples used to calculate ECC2, cc2a, ECC3, and S2 varies for
different measurements due to some embryos not exhibiting clear evidence
of certain events. Overall, our result suggests that the timing of early
embryonic cell cycles primarily inﬂuences hatching capabilities, while the
grades of ICM or TE are not signiﬁcantly affected.
Time-lapse OCM allows quantitative analysis of cell nuclei sym-
metry and polarity
Furthermore, we assessed nuclei symmetry at the 2-cell stage and explored
the polarity at the 8-cell stage to gain deeper insights into early embryo
development. To quantify the nuclei symmetry, we deﬁned the volume
symmetry ratio as the absolute difference between two nuclei divided by the
volume of the larger nucleus (Fig. 6A). In this analysis, a higher level of
symmetry is indicated by a ratio closer to one. Most embryos show a con-
siderable status of symmetry.
With that, we aimed to investigate any potential relationship between
cell symmetry at the 2-cell stage and the formation or quality of blastocysts.
Initially,wecategorizedthevolumesymmetryratiosintotheblastocystsand
embryos that could not form blastocysts. However, our analysis revealed no
statistically signiﬁcant differences between the symmetry of the two groups,
Fig. 4 | Localization of pronuclei, nuclei, and
hatching sites with OCM. A OCM images showing
two pronuclei at one-cell stage at different depths: 0,
7, 14, 21 μm. B Time-lapse OCM showing the
behavior during the ﬁrst cleavage. C Demonstration
of cell polarity visualization at 8-cell stage, nuclei
1–8 were labeled in the OCM images at different
depths: 0, 7, 14, 21 μm. D Hatching sites observed in
relation to the location of ICM: A-site (1–2 o’clock),
C-site (4–5 o’clock), and D-site (5–6 o’clock). The
right panel displays two hatching sites. Purple seg-
ments in 3D OCM stand for ICM. All scale
bars: 20 μm.
A
BF image
Sum slice
0 μm
7 μm
14 μm
21 μm
3D OCM
PN1
PN2
PN2
PN1
BF image
Sum slice
0 μm
7 μm
14 μm
21 μm
3D OCM
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
5
6
7
3
4
8
C
B
0 min
53 min
75 min
85 min
106 min
127 min
Depth1
Depth2
D
Scale bar: 20 μm
A-site
C-site
D-site
Abnormal
BF image
BF image
BF image
BF image
OCM en face
OCM en face
OCM en face
OCM en face
3D OCM
3D OCM
3D OCM
3D OCM
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08044-5
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:612 
5
Fig. 5 | Correlation between blastocyst formation and morphological grading
and morphokinetic parameters. A Deﬁnition of morphokinetic parameter42,75.
t2-t8: ﬁrst occurrence of two to eight discrete cells, respectively; tSC: the ﬁrst
evidence of compaction; tSB: Initiation of blastulation; Herniation; end of expansion
phase and initiation of hatching. B Deﬁnition of blastocyst grades. C–E Timing
of early embryo developments in all groups. C ECC2 (p = 0.024), D cc2a
(p = 0.00013), E S2 (p = 0.10). Unit: hour. Student’s t-test: *: p < 0.05, ***: p < 0.001,
NS: nosigniﬁcance. F–I Timing of early embryo developments in different blastocyst
groups. F ECC2 (Expansion grade: p = 0.0019; ICM grade: p = 0.87; TE grade:
p = 0.051), G cc2a (Expansion grade: p = 0.0069; ICM grade: p = 0.42; TE grade:
p = 0.37), H ECC3 (Expansion grade: p = 0.0063; ICM grade: p = 0.90; TE grade:
p = 0.076), I S2 (Expansion grade: p = 0.79; ICM grade: p = 0.17; TE grade: p = 0.36).
Unit: hour. Error bars indicate ± SD. Student’s t-test: **: p < 0.01, NS no signiﬁcance.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08044-5
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:612 
6
as indicated in Fig. 6B. We then explored the volume symmetry ratios of the
groups with good and poor performance in maximumexpansion,ICM,and
TEgradesdeﬁnedintheprevioussection.Similarly,nosigniﬁcantdifference
was noticed between the groups, as depicted in Fig. 6C.
Discussion
In this study, we developed and deployed a dual-modality imaging system
and an automatic pipeline. This system allowed us to simultaneously cap-
ture OCM and BF images for ten embryos at ten-minute intervals. By doing
so, we were able to obtain a comprehensive understanding of both the
structure and dynamic changes occurring in developing embryos. Over a
period of ﬁve days, we conducted longitudinal studies to examine the
process of embryo development starting from the 1-cell stage. We identiﬁed
factors that impact blastocyst formation and quality. It suggested that the
timing of early embryonic cell cycles played a primary role in hatching
capabilities.Conversely,we did not observe signiﬁcant effects onthe ICM or
TE grades.
Time-lapseOCMimagingsigniﬁcantlyenhancesourunderstandingof
embryonic morphological features from the 1-cell stage to fully hatched
blastocysts by capturing 3D microstructures. This imaging technique allows
for the precise detection of nuclei, compaction process, ICM distribution
evaluation, and hatching site identiﬁcation. Detecting nuclei shown as the
black inner signal against cytoplasm aids in accurate developmental stage
classiﬁcation45, even when overlapping cells are not visibly distinct in 2D BF
images. The label-free time-lapse OCM enables capturing nuclei events
during the ﬁrst cleavage, distinguishing it from confocal images that require
labeling46. Furthermore, the 3D ICM and TE morphology observed from
OCMfacilitatesgradingbasedontheGardnergradingsystem.Additionally,
OCM can characterize the hatching site (Supplementary Movie 1), which
signiﬁcantly impacts the successful outcome of pregnancy in mice43. 3D
OCM imaging provides an added beneﬁt for embryologists. It addresses the
challengeofobservingspeciﬁcfeaturesbyphysicallyrotatingtheembryosas
needed. In traditional time-lapse imaging, embryos naturally rotate during
development, potentially obstructing the visibility of regions of interest.
With 3D datasets, we can accurately register the orientation of the embryo
and obtain a comprehensive view that includesthe rotational movements to
facilitatethecomprehensionofthestructures.Toillustratethis,weshowcase
the quantitative assessment of symmetry during the 2-cell stage, as well as
the analysis of polarity during the 8-cell stage. These aspects are challenging
to distinguish using conventional bright-ﬁeld imaging but carry potential
medical signiﬁcance if abnormalities exist. Symmetry has been widely
recognized as a crucial factor in mammalian embryos during their initial
development. Recent studies have provided evidence suggesting a correla-
tion between symmetry at the 4-cell stage in human embryos and embryo
aneuploidy47. Additionally, ﬁndings indicate that porcine embryos with
symmetrical cleavage at the 2-cell stage exhibit higher rates of successful
development compared to the asymmetrical groups48. Although our results
did not include asymmetrical examples at the 2-cell stage, we have suc-
cessfully developed a pipeline for conducting symmetrical analysis during
the early development. Following that, the polarization process, which
typically initiates during the 8- to 16-cell stage, is regarded as an essential
event involved in determining the fate of cells, leading them to develop into
either the TE or the ICM49–51. Live cell staining and biomarker expression
analysishavebeenutilizedtounderstandthepolarizationprocess.However,
time-lapse OCM offers a label-free alternative for visualizing nuclei,
allowing embryos to develop without damage.
Morphokinetic parameters, primarily supported by BF imaging, also
contribute to the evaluation, suggesting that timing can serve as an indicator
of bothblastocystformationandquality.Concurrenttime-lapseOCM plays
a complementary role; for example, when two or more blastomeres overlap,
Fig. 6 | Segmentation of nuclei reveals the capability of cell symmetry and polarity
measurements. A Volume symmetry ratio is deﬁned in the 2-cell stage, with nuclei 1
and 2 segmented and indicated in the OCM images using red numbers. Pink in the
3D OCM rendering stands for nuclei. Scale bar: 20 μm. B, C Volume symmetry ratio
between blastocysts and non-blastocysts (p = 0.45) (B), and different grades of
blastocysts (C) (Expansion grade: p = 0.40; ICM grade: p = 0.25; TE grade: p = 0.72).
Error bars indicate ± SD. Student’s t-test: NS no signiﬁcance.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08044-5
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:612 
7
the cleavage is difﬁcult to identify in 2D BF. It is also more accurate to
determine the stage by visualizing the nuclei or blastocoel expansion in
OCM rather than in BF, especially at or beyond the 8-cell stage. The results
indicate that maintaining an appropriate duration for the second and third
embryo cycles may be related to the hatching capability of the mouse
embryos. Conversely, a reduced duration of ECC2 and cc2a may be asso-
ciated with the failure of blastocyst formation. While much of the char-
acterization regarding timing has been focused on human embryos, there is
limited comparable literature on the timing of the second embryonic cell
cycle. Our results demonstrated the consistency with mouse embryos.
Unlike humans, where the synchronization of divisions and cleavage pat-
terns (S2 and S3) can be employed as a biomarker52, neighboring cells in the
mouse embryo do not divide simultaneously. Instead, a dividing cell typi-
cally completesits division minutestohours before neighboring cells divide.
This explains why no signiﬁcant variation was observed in S2 and S3 among
embryos of different qualities.
Despite demonstrating its beneﬁts, this study still has areas for
improvement. The current experiments employed a smaller scale of ﬁfty
embryos in contrast to time-lapse imaging studies that typically involve a
larger sample size in the thousands. There are few examples of different
behaviors due to the limited number of samples. Nonetheless, this sample
size is adequate for showcasing the capability of time-lapse OCM and for
indicating the observed trend. By successfully implementing the platform,
the study can be further expanded to include a larger dataset for extensive
applications.
Another limitation is the resolution and image quality for ﬁner details,
such as subcellular features during the ﬁrst embryo cycle. Full-ﬁeld OCM,
a variant of OCT based on plane detection from full-ﬁeld illumination,
has demonstrated excellent capabilities in resolving intracellular structures,
such as nuclear envelope ﬂuctuations53 and cytoplasmic aggregation54.
Though promising, it is challenging to ﬁt a full-ﬁeld OCM system inside
a commercial incubator for long-term time-lapse monitoring of the
developing embryos. For 3D OCM, there is room to improve the quality
by reducing the effect of the speckle noise inherent in OCM images.
Our current OCM images suffered from speckle noise, which impaired
the imaging quality. Researchers have used averaging protocols to eliminate
the speckle noise in the embryos30,55. However, it may sacriﬁce the imaging
speed and reduce the temporal resolution. Other strategies for speckle
noise reduction include hardware modiﬁcation, e.g., speckle-modulation56,
and software processing, e.g., SM-GAN network57. With denoising meth-
ods, we can facilitate the visualization of microstructures with enhanced
image quality. Additionally, unwanted strong reﬂections in OCM from the
bottom of the dish (as seen in Supplementary Movies 1, 8, and 9 for the
cross-sectional view) have posed a challenge for visualization and imaging
processing. It is due to the mismatch of refractive indices between the
two materials. A previous study addressed this by coating imaging
glass dishes with a thin layer of agarose (which has a similar refractive
index to embryos)30. However, this method may introduce concerns
regarding the inﬂuence of agarose on embryos and increase complexity.
To make the approach more practical, we could use coated plates with
biocompatible materials that do not dissolve in the media or materials with
refractive indices similar to embryos (ranging from 1.3 to 1.4)58, such as
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, approximately 1.4)59. Ultimately, there is a
tradeoff between imaging resolution, 3D capabilities, imaging speed, post-
processing, and sample preparation complexity to achieve the optimal
imaging solution.
Unlike procedures that require physical intervention with the sample,
such as taking a biopsy of a few cells for PGT, this dual-modal live cell
imagingis notconsidered invasive.The concerns,however,aremore related
to phototoxicity and photobleaching, especially in time-lapse systems,
which, conversely, emphasize the advantages of using OCM. Previous
studies30,32,55 demonstrated that the use of low-intensity near-infrared light
in OCM does not compromise the well-being of embryos. In contrast, some
other optical modalities, such as BF and ﬂuorescence microscopy, pose a
concern for repeated imaging of embryo health, speciﬁcally in terms of
exposure to short-wavelength light60. To reduce phototoxicity, we ensured
the OCM laser and BF LED were only active during imaging and kept the
setup in an incubator to prevent room light exposure. The OCM beam
continuously scans the sample, further limiting light exposure to the same
location. For OCM, our reported optical power (1.68 mW) remains well
within the safe limit. According to the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI)61, the maximum permissible exposure for the retina is
~2.00 mW at 800 nm, which is higher than the optical power used in our
OCM imaging system. The BF LED remains on during auto-tracking and
lasts ~576 s per day, longer than some commercial time-lapse systems, such
as EmbryoScope62. In the next iteration of our system, the white light LED
can be replaced with a red LED (e.g., 635 nm), and the optical power can be
further reduced. Additionally, we will update the software to minimize the
time needed for auto-tracking. We will assess the phototoxicity and inﬂu-
ence of time-lapse dual-modal imaging experimentally after upgrading our
system.
Other challenges lie in improving the throughput of the system. The
currently available time-lapse system can culture 10–16 embryos per dish
and accommodate several dishes (ranging from 1 to 15) for different
patients27. Our current throughput (10–25 embryos) is comparable but
not yet fully optimized. The imaging of each embryo takes about 1 min,
with stage movement and data transfer accounting for two-thirds of the
time. We are developing software to parallelize these processes, poten-
tially saving 30 s per embryo and improving efﬁciency. Parallel imaging,
such as space-division multiplexing OCT63, also offers the potential to
signiﬁcantly enhance imaging speed by simultaneously monitoring
multiple samples. Additionally, 3D-printed holders may be designed to
support at least four imaging dishes to further increase the imaging
throughput.
Afterimageacquisition,annotatingandanalyzingtheextensivedataset
remains labor-intensive. These tasks include identifying cell and nuclei
locations in early stages, labeling ICM and TE at the blastocyst stage, and
grading embryo quality during different developmental stages. Machine
learning64,65 and deep learning66,67 methods are commonly employed to aid
in IVF processes. However, these models require a signiﬁcant number of
datasets for training and validation, which rely on the 2D BF image in the
majority. Our high-throughput system enables the accumulation of crucial
datasets, especially the novel time-lapse 3D OCM images, supporting the
development of automated segmentation and classiﬁcation learning-based
algorithms. Previous publications have demonstrated the use of learning-
based models on 3D OCM, such as organoids68,69. This existing knowledge
and experience can provide a smoothfoundation for transferring the idea to
3D time-lapse OCM segmentation and classiﬁcation on mammalian
embryos.
Beyond what we have demonstrated in this paper, the dual-modal
imaging system has the potential to facilitate the evaluation of embryo
quality by extracting critical parameters. For example, time-lapse BF ima-
ging can more effectively identify atypical human embryo cleavage features
than traditional daily embryo morphology assessments, capturing para-
meters with signiﬁcant biological and clinical relevance70. On the other
hand, time-lapse OCM provides detailed 3D morphology visualization,
especially with high contrast for nuclei, enabling the quantiﬁcation of cell
symmetry and polarization. Together, these modalities can address several
technical challenges in imaging. For instance, while BF is well-suited to
visualize TE cell distribution, OCM is better at quantifying their evenness
andsize.Additionally,embryosmaynotalwaysbeorientedoptimallyfor2D
imaging, but these features can be observed using 3D OCM. These two
modalities complement each other effectively. A generalized workﬂow
could involve embryologists quickly reviewing BF videos to identify devel-
opmental defects such as early compaction71,72 and prolonged blastomere
movement73. They can further examine the corresponding OCM images for
suspicious time points to check for morphological abnormalities such as
multinucleation and perform morphological grading of blastocysts42. 3D
time-lapse OCM videos can also be reviewed to identify rotational move-
ments and other dynamic features.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08044-5
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:612 
8
The dual-modality imaging system effectively overcomes various
challenges. Firstly, the miniaturized design of the system ensures compat-
ibility with commercial incubators, enabling proper control of gas, tem-
perature, and humidity with accessibility for laboratories and clinics.
Second, integrating two modalities in the system provides a comprehensive
view of the samples, as discussed above. This platform also presents an
elegant solution by enabling fully automated acquisition. Equipped with
3-axisstagesanddevelopedauto-trackingandauto-focusingalgorithms,the
system also enables the simultaneous imaging of up to 25 embryos with
intervals of 10–15 min. With all these beneﬁts, the system excels in long-
itudinally monitoring embryos over extended periods with high spatio-
temporal resolution.
The promising outlook of the noninvasive automatic time-lapse OCM
and BF imaging system extends beyond research settings, as it also offers
valuable applications in clinical practice. For research purposes, this plat-
form allows high-throughput screening to optimize culture conditions,
including media and oxygen concentration74, to improve embryo health
during extended culture. This study also highlights the potential to inves-
tigate the mechanisms and behaviors during early embryonic development
with the beneﬁt of noninvasiveness. For clinical implications, it provides
more precise and accurate evaluations, making it a promising tool for
developingmorphokineticmarkersthat correlatewithblastocystformation.
It materializes in the futureof IVF applicationinclinicsasa reference for the
evaluation and selection of the most viable embryos.
In conclusion, our study demonstrates the potential of automatic time-
lapse OCM and BF imaging as a noninvasive and informative tool for
evaluating embryo development. We performed longitudinal monitoring
on mouse embryos for over ﬁve days. Our ﬁndings indicate the importance
of early embryonic cell cycle timing in hatching capabilities, while the ICM
or TE grades show limited association. Continued reﬁnement of this ima-
ging method can enhance embryo assessment and deepen our under-
standingofearlyembryonicdevelopment.Thenoninvasiveautomatictime-
lapse OCM and BF imaging system enables high-throughput screening and
developmental studies, paving the way for evaluating and selecting the most
viable embryos for IVF practice.
Materials and methods
Embryo culture procedure
The mouse embryos were sourced commercially and no live mice were
involved in this study, and development was terminated immediately post-
hatching. This situation does not require Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (IACUC) approval. Cryopreserved mouse embryos at the one-
cell stage (B1–10, IVF store) were thawed by removing them from liquid
nitrogen storage and allowing them to reach room temperature over a
period of 2 min gradually. The straw containing the embryos was cleaned
with 70% ethanol and transferred into a sterile hood for further handling.
Following this, the embryos were immediately dispensed onto a sterile peri-
dish and underwent a washing process. Four rounds of washing were per-
formed using micropipettes, with each round in a different drop of 250 μL
Multipurpose Handling Medium-Complete (MHM-C) media (90166,
FUJIFILM) on the same peri-dish. The embryos were then left in the ﬁnal
drop for a total of ten minutes to rehydrate. After rehydration, the embryos
were transferred from the peri-dish to a Well-of-the-Well (WOW) culture
dish(V005001,IVFstore),witheachembryo placed inaseparatemicrowell.
The culture dish was preloaded with 50–100 μL of MHM-C media and
coveredwith 2–3 mL of mineral oilbefore the transfer of the embryos.From
this point forward, the culture dish was placed inside a controlled incubator
at 37 °C with precise levels of 6% CO2 and 5% O2, ensuring proper condi-
tions for embryo development until the end of imaging.
Dual-modality (OCM and BF) imaging system
To image the development of mouse embryos longitudinally without
interruptions, we built a customized dual-modality imaging platform inside
a commercial incubator (Heracell™VIOS 160i CO2 Incubator), shown in
Fig. 1A. Our system consists of standard bright-ﬁeld (BF) microscopy and
spectral-domain optical coherence microscopy (SD-OCM) inside the
incubator. The light source for SD-OCM is a broadband superluminescent
diode laser with a center wavelength of 850 nm and a spectral bandwidth of
168 nm (cBLMD-T-850-HP, Superlum). The spectrometer (Cobra-S 800,
Wasatch Photonics) captured the SD-OCM interferogram between the
sample and reference arms. The axial resolution of our SD-OCM was
~2.1 μm in tissue, and the lateral resolution was ~1.0 μm measured using a
USAF1951resolutiontargetwitha20×objectivelens(MPLANNIR20/NA
0.40, MITUTOYO). The measured power of the OCM imaging beam was
~1.68 mW at 850 nm. The integrated BF system has a white LED and a 2D
monochrome camera (DMM 42BUC03-ML, The Imaging Source) while
sharingthesameobjectiveastheSD-OCMsystem.TheBFmoduleachieved
a resolution at ~1.7 μm with L6 (AC254-075-B-ML, Thorlabs), measured
based on the USAF 1951 resolution target. The measured BF optical power
was ~1.0 mW. A dichroic mirror (FF757-Di01-25 × 36, Semrock) separates
the OCM light from the BF imaging path. To mitigate the impact of
humidity on the opticaland electronic equipment, we used dielectric-coated
mirrors instead of silver-coated ones, stainless steel screws, and safeguarded
all electronic connections with waterproof cable jackets. The scan protocol
of each mouse embryo includes 500 axial scans (A-scans) per frame
with 500 frames per volumetric dataset for OCM and one 2D BF image.
The transverse ﬁeld of view of BF and OCM is ~628 μm × 470 μm and
~360 μm × 360 μm, respectively. The A-scan rate of the OCM system is set
at 80 kHz, with a B-scan rate of ~115 Hz for all recordings. Each OCM
image acquisition requires approximately 4 s, and no temporal averaging
was employed. 8–12 embryos were imaged per experiment every ten min-
utes with OCM and BF images. The total acquisition time for BF and OCT
images was approximately 4.5 s. Stage movement and auto-tracking took
about 20 s (4 s per iteration for auto-tracking and auto-focusing). Data
transfer and saving required an additional 20 s, with the system remaining
idle for the remainder of the time.
Auto-tracking and auto-focusing algorithm
To enable high-throughput time-lapse imaging, our imaging platform
integrated a 3-axis motorized stage for locating each embryo, with an auto-
tracking algorithm based on a BF image and an auto-focusing algorithm
based on an OCM cross-sectional image. Supplementary Fig. 1A shows a
captured2DBFimageofamouseembryo.Thepreciseboundaryoftheplate
well is located using a simple threshold method. Then, the auto-tracking
algorithm calculates the center of the plate indicated by the green cross in
Supplementary Fig. 1A. The commands are sent to the motorized stage to
align the center of the plate and the image at a restricted distance. Iteratively,
theplatewillreachthecenteroftheﬁeldofview(FOV).Auto-focusingstarts
after auto-tracking. Supplementary Fig. 1B shows a captured OCM cross-
sectional image. Auto-focusing algorithm searches along the depth across
the frame. The boundary of the plate was found by intensity difference
against the background, plotted by the green dots in Supplementary Fig. 1B.
The algorithm uses a quadratic polynomial curve ﬁtting (red line) to seg-
ment the boundary. Similarly, the commands sent to the stage will move the
vertex of the ﬁtted curve (blue crossing) to a preset focus location. After
auto-tracking and auto-focusing, the software saves the last positions and
moves to the recorded coordinates the next time.
Image processing
The customized acquisition software based on GPU acceleration (GeForce
RTX 3090, Nvidia Corporation) helps efﬁcient OCM signal and image
processing. OCM imageswere resized to have isotropic voxels using custom
MATLABscriptsforthefollowinganalysis.TheprojectionsofOCMimages
visualized in Figs. 3C, D, 4C, D were a spatial average of 5 frames. The
visualization and segmentation of our images were obtained using Amira
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), using resized images without averaging. The
time-lapse videos of each embryo were generated through MATLAB
(MathWorks, R2023b). Similarly, the OCM projections were spatially
averaged over 5 frames, and auto-contrast enhancement was performed for
video visualization. 3D visualization was provided with ImageJ and Amira.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08044-5
Article
Communications Biology |  (2025) 8:612 
9
Morphokinetic parameters and morphological grading
This study included 51 embryos with a mix of normal and abnormal
behaviors. The critical events were determined manually based on the BF
and OCM images. As denoted in Fig. 5A, multiple morphokinetic variables
were observed and selected for analysis according to the published
guidelines42,75. For each timing, the ﬁrst occurrence of the expected phe-
nomenon is deﬁned by the corresponding time-lapse frame. The mor-
phokinetic parameters were characterized as follows: t2-t8 represented the
ﬁrst occurrence of two to eight discrete cells, tSC indicated the ﬁrst evidence
of compaction, tSB denoted the initiation of blastulation, tHNyz referred to
herniation or the end of the expansion phase and initiation of hatching.
From there, we selected the calculated variables to reﬂect the embryo cycle
and synchronization features in the early stages. ECC2 (t4-t2) represented
the duration of the second embryo cell cycle, cc2a (t3-t2) indicated the cell
cycle of the ﬁrst blastomere ‘a’, ECC3 (t8-t4) represented the duration of the
third embryo cell cycle, and S2 (t4-t3) and S3 (t8-t5) represented the syn-
chronization of cell divisions and cleavage patterns, respectively. Embryos
with difﬁcult-to-identify or missing stage assignments were excluded from
the analysis of related parameters.
In our analysis, we incorporated the Gardner grading system to eval-
uate the quality of blastocysts. Gardner scores of each blastocyst were
provided based on established guidelines42. The Gardner embryo grading
system assesses embryo quality in expansion, TE, and ICM quality. In brief,
the expansion grade assigns a numerical value from 1 to 6, with higher
numbers indicating greater blastocyst expansion. The ICM or TE grade
assessesthe quality of the ICM and TE based on criteria suchas cellnumber,
density,andothermorphologicalcharacteristics,usinggradesA,B,and Cto
indicate the quality from good to poor. In this study, we deﬁned three
criteria: maximum expansion grade, ICM grade,and TE grade derived from
the Gardner grading system, as shown in Fig. 5B. The maximum expansion
gradeservesasameasureoftheblastocyst’sabilitytocontinuedeveloping.A
higher expansion grade suggests the embryo’s potential to progress in
development, possibly implying improved quality. In this study, we deﬁned
the ‘Good’ expansion grade as embryos capable of hatch