REVIEW
Modelling human genetic disorders in Xenopus tropicalis
Helen Rankin Willsey1,2,*, Eleanor G. Seaby3, Annie Godwin4, Sarah Ennis3, Matthew Guille4 and
Robert M. Grainger5
ABSTRACT
Recent progress in human disease genetics is leading to rapid
advances in understanding pathobiological mechanisms. However,
the sheer number of risk-conveying genetic variants being identified
demands in vivo model systems that are amenable to functional
analyses at scale. Here we provide a practical guide for using the diploid
frog species Xenopus tropicalis to study many genes and variants to
uncover conserved mechanisms of pathobiology relevant to human
disease. We discuss key considerations in modelling human genetic
disorders: genetic architecture, conservation, phenotyping strategy and
rigour, as well as more complex topics, such as penetrance,
expressivity, sex differences and current challenges in the field. As
the patient-driven gene discovery field expands significantly, the cost-
effective, rapid and higher throughput nature of Xenopus make it an
essential
member of
the
model
organism
armamentarium
for
understanding gene function in development and in relation to disease.
KEY WORDS: Disease, Genetics, CRISPR, Xenopus tropicalis
Introduction
Immense progress in exome- and genome-wide DNA analyses,
coupled with the generation of large-scale genetic and phenotypic
databases, has led to the curation of long lists of high-confidence
disease-causing genes for a multitude of human genetic diseases
affecting all tissues (Bamshad et al., 2019). However, the molecular,
cellular, developmental and homeostatic functions of most of these
genes are either unknown or poorly understood. Adding to this
complexity, most genes are pleiotropic, so even when the function of
a gene in one tissue at one developmental time is known, this
knowledge may not translate to other tissues, times or contexts
(Cummings et al., 2020; Panagiotakos and Pasca, 2022; Sestan and
State, 2018; Willsey et al., 2018a, 2022b). This challenge of
interpreting disease-risk gene lists can be readily met by using the
high-throughput vertebrate model system Xenopus tropicalis, a
diploid frog species (Bhattacharya et al., 2015; Blackburn and
Miller, 2019; Deniz et al., 2018; Edwards et al., 2021; Exner
and Willsey, 2021; Fainsod and Moody, 2022; Getwan and
Lienkamp, 2017; Grainger, 2012; Griffin et al., 2020; Harland and
Grainger, 2011; Hwang et al., 2019; Nakayama et al., 2015; Nenni
et al., 2019; Willsey et al., 2022a). Like its closely related but
allotetraploid species Xenopus laevis, X. tropicalis (hereafter also
referred to as Xenopus) is amenable to fast genetic analysis of
multiple organ systems simultaneously, affordably, and at scale
(Abu-Daya and Godwin, 2023). Here we describe the unique
advantages of the powerful model organism X. tropicalis for the
diagnosis of human disorders and as a tool for understanding the
molecular mechanisms underlying them. We also discuss the crucial
considerations that are needed to promote rigorous and informative
work when using X. tropicalis.
Experimental advantages of Xenopus for modelling human genetic
disorders
X. tropicalis has unique experimental advantages that render it well-
suited for modelling human genetic disorders (Exner and Willsey,
2021). First, X. tropicalis has a diploid genome that is highly
conserved between frogs and humans (Hellsten et al., 2010); its high
level of synteny makes the identification of orthologous genes
more straightforward than in animal models with less conservation
and/or a duplicated genome. Second, the model organism database
Xenbase (https://www.xenbase.org; RRID:SCR_003280) provides
user-friendly access to the accurate, annotated reference genome, with
excellent tools to facilitate genetic analysis and interpretation (Fisher
et al., 2023; Fortriede et al., 2020). Additionally, methods for
maintaining a thriving laboratory colony arewell-established and costs
significantly less than maintaining rodents (Nakayama and Grainger,
2023; Shaidani et al., 2020). X. tropicalis can be induced to mate year-
round, with a single pair producing 4000+ embryos in a day by natural
mating or by in vitro fertilisation (Lane and Khokha, 2022a,b).
Embryos develop quickly; by day 4 they have developed organ
systems, such as the central and peripheral nervous system, sensory
organs, kidneys, skeletal muscle and cardiovascular systems, but not
lungs or limbs. Within 10 days they exhibit robust quantitative
behaviours that can serve as phenotypic readouts (Ismail et al., 2022).
Genetic perturbation protocols for X. tropicalis, including CRISPR/
Cas9 mutagenesis (Bhattacharya et al., 2015; Nakayama et al., 2013),
are well-established and cost-effective. Conveniently, mutagenesis of
one of the two cells at 2-cell stage embryo yields a unilateral mutant,
with one half of the animal carrying a homozygous mutation of
interest while the other half serves as a within-animal control (DeLay
et al., 2018; Macken et al., 2021; Willsey et al., 2018b). This is unique
to Xenopus and makes generating thousands of mutant embryos per
day feasible, thereby enabling truly parallelized analysis of dozens of
risk genes by using a within-animal control. Indeed, this CRISPR-
based strategy has a proven track record of exceptional success in
studying autism spectrum disorders (ASD) risk genes (Willsey et al.,
2021; Rosenthal et al., 2021), congenital anomalies (Kariminejad
et al., 2019; Barbosa et al., 2020; Macken et al., 2021) cancer
(Dimitrakopoulou et al., 2019), congenital heart disease (Deniz et al.,
2018, 2023), kidney disease (DeLay et al., 2018; Getwan and
Lienkamp, 2017) and many more (Edwards et al., 2021; Grand et al.,
1Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Weill Institute for
Neurosciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA. 2Chan Zuckerberg Biohub - San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94518, USA.
3Genomic Informatics Group, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton SO16 6YD, UK. 4European Xenopus Resource Centre (EXRC),
School of Biological Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth PO1 2DY, UK.
5Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA.
*Author for correspondence (helen.willsey@ucsf.edu)
H.R.W., 0000-0001-8404-3291; E.G.S., 0000-0002-6814-8648; A.G., 0000-
0001-5264-7824; S.E., 0000-0003-2648-0869; M.G., 0000-0001-6865-4519;
R.M.G., 0000-0003-4539-5280
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2024. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Disease Models & Mechanisms (2024) 17, dmm050754. doi:10.1242/dmm.050754
Disease Models & Mechanisms
2023; Sega et al., 2019). Similarly, the developmental fate map of the
early embryo has been described in detail (Nakamura and Kishiyama,
1971; Hirose and Jacobson, 1979; Jacobson and Hirose, 1981; Dale
and Slack, 1987; Moody, 1987a,b; Masho, 1988; Masho and Kubota,
1986; Moody and Kline, 1990), allowing researchers to target genetic
perturbations to specific tissues without using complex and time-
consuming genetic methods.
Many transgenic and mutant lines are readily available, and there
are protocols for generating new ones quickly (Aslan et al., 2017;
Bhattacharya et al., 2015; Noble et al., 2022; Ogino et al., 2006;
Shibata et al., 2022). Conveniently, The National Xenopus Resource
(NXR; RRID: RRID:SCR_013731) and the European Xenopus
Resource Centre (EXRC; RRID: SCR_007164) offer services for
generating germline mutant lines for the community. Transgenic lines
are proven tools for isolating tissues for single-cell analyses (Aztekin
et al., 2019; Kakebeen et al., 2020), and protocols for isolating nuclei
from mutant lines allow investigators to efficiently perform single-
cell gene expression analyses comparing mutant and wild-type
embryos (Nakayama et al., 2022a). The generation of mutant lines
has recently been expedited by using gynogenesis protocols, in which
the paternal genome is not inherited and researchers are, therefore,
able to skip a generation in making homozygous mutants (Nakayama
et al., 2022b). Similarly, a long history of genetic tool development
and ease of phenotyping exists for Xenopus. Below, we expand on
these and their most appropriate applications in this context. Another
powerful feature of frog embryos and tadpoles is that they absorb
small molecules from their surrounding culture medium, facilitating
large-scale drug screening (Gull et al., 2023; Wheeler and Liu, 2012).
In the search for targeted therapeutics for rare genetic disorders, this
advantage is paramount.
Moreover, studying human disease genes in Xenopus has a history
of producing phenotypes that often more closely recapitulate the
human condition than even rodent models. For example, mutations in
the essential eye transcription factor gene pax6 in Xenopus result in a
phenotype very similar to that of patients with the rare disease
congenital aniridia (Nakayama et al., 2015), while mutations of this
gene in mouse lead to a dissimilar ‘small-eye’ phenotype (Hill et al.,
1991). In another example, genetic variants in the scaffold protein-
encoding gene USH1C cause the rare disorder Usher syndrome 1C,
and lead to both deafness and blindness in patients. Both the
characteristic human eye and ear abnormalities are recapitulated in the
ush1c-mutant of X. tropicalis, but the structure responsible for the eye
deficit is absent in rodent photoreceptor cells and, thus, these animals
are not optimal models for Usher syndrome 1C (Schietroma et al.,
2017). The key point here is that mammalian models, despite their
relative evolutionary proximity, do not always mimic all the features of
a human disorder, and that non-mammalian models, like Xenopus,
mayofferadvantages – either in phenotype as noted here oreven when
the Xenopus phenotype is not identical to that shown by humans. This
is because the frog has advantages regarding the unique experimental
strategies that are possible in this system. Finally, with respect to the
responsible use of animals in research – i.e. the 3Rs: Replacement,
Reduction and Refinement of animal experimentation, initially
formulated by William Russell and Rex Burch in 1959 (see
Hubrecht and Carter, 2019) – using Xenopus as a model rather than
mammals is also attractive due to the absence of cerebral and limbic
structures responsible for the translation of pain to distress, which are
present in humans.
Getting started – gene selection considerations
There are many routes to begin functional genetics work in
Xenopus. For example, one group may begin with a single patient
who presents with several potential disease-causing variants, and
need to first prioritise variants for functional investigation by using
Xenopus. Alternatively, another group may have a long-standing
interest in a particular disease and want to model previously unseen
variants observed in known disease-causing genes. In another
scenario, a group may begin with an organ of interest and want to
identify disease-causing genes that affect this organ. Finally, as the
number of variants of uncertain significance (VUS) from DNA-
sequencing projects continues to increase ever more rapidly,
researchers may work in an integrated manner with clinical
geneticists and bioinformaticians to test variant-disease links in
Xenopus. The diverse array of starting points is a testament to the
versatility of Xenopus functional genomics. Here we will focus on
the first scenario, which highlights many of the core considerations
that are paramount to any study modelling human disease genetics.
When considering multiple potential disease-causing variants
within one patient, a helpful strategy for prioritising variants for
modelling in Xenopus is to determine whether any loss-of-function
(LOF) – i.e. frameshift, essential splice site or nonsense – variants in
that gene ever occur in unaffected subjects. If LOF variants of a gene
occur in unaffected controls, the gene in question is considered ‘LOF
tolerant’ and not to be under evolutionary constraint, so is less likely
to be disease causing. To quantify LOF constraint, there is a metric
called the LOF observed/expected upper-bound fraction (LOEUF)
score (Karczewski et al., 2020). Genes with a low LOEUF score are
intolerant to gene perturbation and, thus, provide clues to biological
essentiality (Karczewski et al., 2020). Indeed, genes with the lowest
LOEUF scores are those most enriched for known disease genes and
represent targets for novel disease gene associations (Seaby et al.,
2022). Therefore, LOF constraint can help prioritise which genes to
study in model systems. LOEUF scores can be found by searching the
Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD), which to date represents
the largest population dataset globally from more than 195,000
individuals,
curated
from
over
60
studies
(https://gnomad.
broadinstitute.org/) (Gudmundsson et al., 2022; Karczewski et al.,
2020) (Table 1). Importantly, this database is generated from
unaffected individuals and, therefore, rare paediatric-onset diseases
are underrepresented in it, meaning that monogenic disease-causing
variants, many of which will be of interest to Xenopus researchers, are
largely absent from this database. Rather, this database is a helpful
resource for ascertaining the baseline variation that occurs in a gene
of interest in an unaffected population. An abundance of LOF
variants within a gene of interest in an unaffected population argues
against its relevance to disease.
Another consideration when prioritising potentially pathogenic
genetic variants for modelling is whether these have already been
noticed in patient populations. Databases where this can be explored
online exist (Table 1), and they often include the genomic location,
gene/protein variant, higher level phenotyping terms, clinical
significance and, occasionally, additional incidental findings. One
of the most-recognised genetic disease databases is the Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (https://www.
omim.org/), a manually curated open-source website that describes
human genes, genetic disorders, inheritance patterns and genotype/
phenotype relationships (Table 1) (Hamosh et al., 2005). Another
widely used human disease dataset is the DECIPHER (https://www.
deciphergenomics.org/) online repository of genetic variation with
associated phenotypes for >45,000 patients with rare disorders
(Table 1) (Firth et al., 2009). The freely available DECIPHER
browser enables the user to search genes, regions and phenotypes
for patients with matching variants. These databases can also be
especially helpful if an investigator is starting with a disorder of
2
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2024) 17, dmm050754. doi:10.1242/dmm.050754
Disease Models & Mechanisms
interest and looking for disease-causing genes to study. To preserve
patient anonymity, only high-level phenotypes (e.g. abnormality of
the cardiovascular system, etc.) are displayed. However, if more
detailed clinical information is required, one can contact the
clinician or principal investigator of the participating centre where
that patient was recruited. This can facilitate access to valuable
additional clinical information, such as when the patient was last
assessed, updates on disease progression and access to information
on co-morbidities or additional damaging variants.
Another very helpful database is ClinVar (https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/clinvar; Landrum et al., 2014), an open-access repository for
the standardised classification of variants (Table 1) (Landrum et al.,
2014). Anyone using the platform can submit a variant found in a
patient sample and assert its clinical significance by applying a
standardised set of guidelines used for diagnostic reporting as set out
by the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) and/or
provide supporting data (Richards et al., 2015). Therefore, the
database can be queried for variants previously described and
validated as pathogenic by ACMG guidelines. ClinVar benefits from
an easy-to-use graphical interface enabling researchers to see where
the different classes of variants lie across the gene, and links to dbVar,
which holds chromosomal information, and to LitVarz, which allows
interrogation of the literature based on specific variants and genes.
Once a potentially disease-causing gene and/or variant has been
identified, an important strategy when deciding whether they could
be productively modelled in Xenopus is to align the protein
sequences from X. tropicalis and human by using the NCBI tool
HomoloGene
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/homologene).
This
can help determine conservation at protein level – which, in turn,
may help selecting reagents, such as antibodies – and whether
generating mutant lines with patient-derived variants is possible.
Xenbase should also be consulted to assess genomic synteny and to
determine which isoforms have been described in Xenopus, and
when and where in development the gene is expressed (Bowes et al.,
2010; Fortriede et al., 2020). This early effort can also preempt any
potential issues with genome annotation. Finally, other databases,
e.g. ModelMatcher (https://www.modelmatcher.net/) and those
specific for model organisms, should be checked for existing
but unpublished models of the disease gene, either to inform
experimental design or to prevent unintentional duplication of effort.
Designing strategies that reflect the genetic architecture of
the disorder
Once a gene(s) of interest has been selected, the next major
consideration is the nature of the patient alleles and the genetic nature
of the disorder of interest. For example, one would model a single-gene
recessive disorder (Appendix G, Single-Gene Disorders, 2010), such
as cystic fibrosis or phenylketonuria, very differently from a complex
heterogenous genetic disorder, like autism, or a disorder in which the
variants are gain-of-function (GoF), like Noonan syndrome (Roberts
et al., 2007). Therefore, familiarity with common genetics terminology
and concepts is essential. Here we briefly explore the most critical ones
encountered in patient variant modelling.
One essential concept isthat of variant effect size and it is critical for
modelling genetic disorders in Xenopus. Common variants, where
population allele frequency exceeds 1%, as identified in genome-wide
association studies (GWAS), carry very small individual effect sizes.
Any individual variant only increases risk very slightly (Fig. 1) but,
Table 1. Examples of patient registries and tissue biobanks.
Registry
Type of data
Availability
Data access
Additional data access
Genome Aggregation
Database (gnomAD)
Population genotype data
Open access
gnomad.broadinstitute.org
Individual level of data can be
applied for through dbGaP1
Genotype-Tissue
Expression (GTEx) portal
Tissue- and cell-specific gene
expression data
Open access
gtexportal.org/home
Individual level of data can be
applied for through dbGaP
Genomics Research to
Elucidate the Genetics of
Rare diseases
(GREGoR) Consortium
Genotype and health data
Requires
consortium
membership
gregorconsortium.org/data
Some data can be applied for
without consortium
membership through dbGaP
Genomics England
Genotype and health data
Requires data
access approval
www.genomicsengland.co.uk
Clinicians can be contacted
using a form within the
secure Genomics England
Research Environment
DECIPHER
Individual pheno- and genotypic
data from patient cohorts with
neurodevelopmental disorders.
Open access
deciphergenomics.org
Clinicians can be contacted
through an online form on
the website
UKBioBank
Biobank data
Requires payment
and data-access
approval
ukbiobank.ac.uk
N/A
All of Us
Biobank data
Open access to
summary data
only
allofus.nih.gov
Researchers can apply for
access to individual data
levels
FinnGen (consortium of
Finnish public biobanks)
Biobank data
Open access to
summary data
only
finngen.fi/fi
Individual level of data
available to consortium
partners
European Genome-
phenome Archive (EGA)
Genetic, phenotypic, and clinical
data
Each study requires
approval to
access
ega-archive.org
N/A
ClinVar
Genotype data
Open access
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar
N/A
Human Gene Mutation
Database (HGMD)
Genotype data
Open access to
limited datasets
following
registration
hgmd.cf.ac.uk/ac/index.php
HGMD professional is
available commercially
1dbGaP, database of Genotypes and Phenotypes
3
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2024) 17, dmm050754. doi:10.1242/dmm.050754
Disease Models & Mechanisms
because they are common, they carry population-level risk. By
contrast, rare variants with population allele frequencies of <1%, as
typically identified in patient trio exome sequencing, carry large
individual risks (Fig. 1). This way, it is much more likely to observe a
phenotype in Xenopus when recapitulating rare variants from patient
sequencing data than common ones. Common variants, often referred
to as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), are also often in
intergenic regions and it can be difficult to reliably assign the affected
gene (reviewed by Boyling et al. 2022). Rare variants from patient
exome sequencing studies are enriched for protein-coding variantsthat
often directly alter protein structure, while common variants often
reside in non-coding regions that can be more difficult to interpret
(reviewed by Allou and Mundlos, 2023). This makes patient-derived
rare variants more straightforward to model and generally more suited
to model organism studies, particularly when LOF variants in the
same gene are reported in multiple unrelated affected individuals,
since this strengthens the likelihood that variants in that gene are
pathogenic.
Copy-number variants (CNVs) often have intermediate effect
sizes and allele frequencies (Willsey et al., 2022b), and can be
modelled in Xenopus, with some caveats. These variants often span
large regions of the human genome, so assessing synteny and
conservation between Xenopus and human is paramount. This is
particularly important as intergenic regions usually do have larger
evolutionary differences than coding regions. Nevertheless, to
model CNVs with CRISPR, one can design two single guide RNAs
(gRNAs) that flank the mapped orthologous CNV breakpoints and
generate large deletions. One can also inject larger DNA constructs
to model duplications. Xenopus embryos will tolerate exogenous
DNA fairly well, though the inheritance of the construct can be
rather mosaic (Cleaver and Krieg, 1999), so it is recommended to
include a visible marker within the construct to track expression
patterns, or to breed the animals, which is time consuming.
Where LOF variants are implicated in disorder pathobiology,
simply perturbing a single gene is the simplest way to model using
CRISPR-based genome editing. One can design an sgRNA that
directs Cas9 to cut near the 5′ end of the coding sequence to
empirically test editing efficiency, and choose sgRNAs of high
efficiency and specificity, with the assumption that the cuts will be
repaired by non-homologous end-joining, thus, most likely
generating deletions and, therefore, frameshift mutations that will
result in a non-functional gene product (Willsey et al., 2022a).
Unlike LOF variants, the impact of missense variants can be harder
to interpret, although there are algorithms that will predict how
deleterious a given variant would be to protein structure and,
therefore, function. Missense badness, PolyPhen-2 and missense
Constraint (collectively forming the MPC) score are some examples
of these algorithms (Samocha et al., 2017 preprint). Mimicking
missense variants will have a very high impact on the field, since a
large proportion of disease variants are missense by nature. Base
editing, which changes a single base without cutting the DNA
backbone and is, therefore, perfectly suited to missense modelling
(Komor et al., 2016), has been shown to work in Xenopus (Shi et al.,
2019; Park et al., 2017; Naert et al., 2020 and 2021b). Xenopus are
particularly suited for this type of modelling due to the ease of
generating many mutant lines. There is also the potential for doing
this work in the generation F0, given the high tolerance of injected
ribonucleoprotein complexes in the frog.
When modelling a complex genetic disorder where many different
genes carry risk, such as most psychiatric disorders, including autism
and schizophrenia, there are advantages to working in Xenopus. In
this case, most of the genes involved are highly pleiotropic, and it is
difficult to separate the pleiotropy of a gene from the relevant
function in the disorder just by studying individual genes (Willsey
et al., 2022b). Instead, it is straightforward in X. tropicalis to study
many genes and/or variants in parallel because of the speed, ease and
cost-effectiveness of CRISPR mutagenesis. In one afternoon,
thousands of mutant embryos can be created for many different
genes. This can allow for the identification of gene functions and
phenotypes that are common for different genes associated with a
particular disease of unknown pathobiology. For example, CRISPR
perturbations of any of the ten genes with the strongest statistical
evidence for association with autism did, individually, cause
neurogenesis defects in Xenopus, highlighting this process as one
potentially relevant to the disorder (Willsey et al., 2021). This
‘phenotypic convergence’ can also combat the formidable problem
of pleiotropy, as studying just one gene at a time may lead to focusing
on a phenotype specific to that particular gene and not phenotypes
more broadly relevant to other disease-risk genes (Willsey et al.,
2021, 2022b). Similarly, performing in situ hybridizations (Willsey,
2021) or screening single-cell transcriptomic atlases (Briggs et al.,
2018) for many risk genes in parallel can help limit the search space
for phenotypes by identifying tissues, cell types and timepoints of
co-expression.
Building gene-specific tools
Once a gene is selected for investigation, and direction of perturbation
and expected effect size have been considered, it is advantageous to
begin developing gene-specific tools (Fig. 2). Often, it can be
extraordinarily helpful to determine the developmental expression
patterns for a gene, as this may point to relevant tissues affected by
genetic perturbation and its function. For example, exclusive
expression in highly ciliated tissues may suggest a potential function
in ciliary biology and, consequently, a role in ciliopathies. This is
particularly useful when studying syndromic conditions that affect
multiple tissues and require an RNA in situ hybridization probe which,
in turn, require a DNA template. Xenopus plasmid libraries of such
Rare variants
of large
effect (exome
sequence)
Common
variants of
small effect
(GWAS)
Allele frequency in the population
Effect size
Fig. 1. Relationship between rare and common variants with respect to
allele frequency and effect size. Rare variants are typically detected in
specific, clinically indicated patient trio (i.e. involving testing of the affected
individual and both biological parents) studies of exome sequencing, and
enriched for de novo variants with individually large effects. When perturbed,
the genes that carry these variants often produce phenotypes in model
organisms. By contrast, common variants are usually identified in much
broader genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of large unrelated
cohorts. Individually, these common variants carry very small risk and are
unlikely to produce a measurable phenotype when recapitulated in model
organisms.
4
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2024) 17, dmm050754. doi:10.1242/dmm.050754
Disease Models & Mechanisms
constructs exist, such as the ORFeome (Grant et al., 2015) and the
I.M.A.G.E. database (Lennon et al., 1996). Many Xenopus-specific
constructs, including those donated from laboratory collections, can
currently be obtained from horizon (https://horizondiscovery.com/en)
or the EXRC. If unavailable, plasmids can be generated by PCR from
a cDNA
library
and
simple
cloning,
which
is
particularly
straightforward in Xenopus because of the high-quality accessible
genome sequence and the ease of which large amounts of stage-
specific cDNA can be obtained. It is important to remember that the
composition of RNA isoforms may change during development
and/or by cell type, and it is advisable to select or engineer the probe
that matches the timepoints and tissues of interest, or the one that
recognizes a coding sequence that is present in all isoforms.
For studies that require probing the product of the gene in question,
investing in a reliable antibody against the Xenopus protein of interest
can be exceptionally helpful for validating reagents, such as sgRNAs,
by confirming that protein levels are altered, and for localising the
protein in cells and tissues. However, all antibodies must be rigorously
validated for specificity and avidity, ideally through confirming the
antibody signal using immunohistochemistry or western blotting, in
tissues that express the target and seeing it abolished in mutant tissues
where the target is absent.
For LOF analyses, developing multiple orthogonal perturbation
reagents is advisable. For CRISPR-based gene knockouts, sgRNAs
can be easily designed through online algorithms (Moreno-Mateos
et al., 2015; Labun et al., 2019). We also recommend that multiple
non-overlapping target sequences are used, as discussed below in the
rigour section. While these algorithms will predict cutting efficiencies,
the actual efficiency for each sgRNA must be empirically determined
in Xenopus embryos. One strategy is to use Sanger sequencing of
injected animals followed by sequence-trace deconvolution, and
estimation of the insertion and deletion frequencies (Brinkman et al.,
2014; Conant et al., 2022). Strategies also exist to maximise
phenotypic penetrance of any gene edits in generation F0 to avoid
in-frame mutations (Naert et al., 2020). A helpful orthogonal strategy
to CRISPR-based gene knockout is to aim for post-transcriptional
knockdown of the target. For this, the first step is to generate and
validate a morpholino oligonucleotide, targeting either the start codon
– thereby, blocking translation of mRNA, or a splice site – thereby,
blocking RNA splicing (Malartre et al., 2006). Morpholinos can be
helpful by strongly knocking down expression of the target gene,
targeting specific isoforms or depleting maternal RNAs from the
zygote. The latter is particularly useful for studying the LOF of
maternally expressed mRNAs, since CRISPRs will only target the
zygotic genome.
Finally, if the protein of interest is amenable to pharmacological
modulation, e.g. by using an inhibitor to block a kinase, this can be a
helpful additional path for orthogonal perturbation. Pharmacological
inhibitors have the additional advantage of temporal control, as the
drug can be added to the embryo culture medium at different times
during development, separating pleiotropic roles or bypassing early
lethality. Ideally, the targeting specificities of such reagents are
controlled by using multiple compounds to target the same protein.
For CRISPR experiments, another possible control is to target any
potential off-target sites revealed by the algorithm used to choose the
sgRNA, to ensure one does not observe the on-target phenotype.
Given the need for relevance to humans, modelling disease-
causing variants extends beyond LOF. Expressing the human coding
sequence can be very helpful for GoF, localization and rescue
experiments, and/or for patient variant testing. It should be noted that
transgenic expression of human genes risks disrupting protein-
protein interactions by crossing species if these interactions are not
evolutionarily conserved, as well as issues with inappropriate
stoichiometries and potential toxicity due to high dosage.
Designing phenotyping assays
Once a disease-causing gene has been selected and the perturbation
strategy optimised, developing a phenotyping pipeline for Xenopus
is straightforward since many tools have been developed and used
for embryology studies in the last 60 years. Fortunately, robust
transcriptomic, in situ hybridization and proteomics data are available
on Xenbase to guide the focus of phenotyping assays. Referring to
transcriptomic and proteomic data can also inform whether any
maternal proteins persisting in the early embryo may mitigate
phenotype presentation in early development. During phenotypic
experiment design, it is useful to plan and conduct pilot studies to help
estimate sample sizes, and to investigate the extent of variability in the
phenotype – particularly when analysing mosaic generation F0 models.
The first readout after a genetic perturbation is usually brightfield
microscopy of the whole animal to identify gross changes and their
relationship to regions of expression or clinical presentation in humans.
Aside from being broadly accessible in every laboratory, whole-animal
examination is important since disruption of gene function in distinct
tissues and at different stages within the whole organism may generate
complex phenotype alterations.
Once the affected organ(s) or cell type(s) have been identified, key
tissue-level and molecular differences can be assessed in more detail
in transgenic Xenopus lines or with techniques, such as in situ
hybridisation and immunohistochemistry. For most human organs
an orthologous Xenopus organ exists at tadpole stage (∼6 days after
fertilisation), and these organs can be studied by simple histological
staining
and
microscopy
techniques
(Fig.
3).
More
subtle
Gene function
• LoF analysis: sgRNAs and MOs
• Human cDNA / variants
 for rescue, VUS testing,
 overexpression
• Mutant lines with
 patient variants
Protein localization
• GFP-tagged human cDNA
• Validated antibody
Locus conservation
• Xenbase
• NCBI
• gnomAD
Gene expression
• RNA probe for
 in situ hybridization
• Xenbase profiles
• Single-cell
 RNA sequencing
Fig. 2. Approaches and tools that facilitate human genetic disease
modelling in Xenopus. Once a gene of interest is selected, the locus
conservation between X. tropicalis and humans can be explored in
Xenbase, NCBI and gnomAD databases. The expression profile of the gene
can be queried by using RNA in situ hybridization and on Xenbase. Then
the protein can be located in cells and embryos through expression of a
tagged human cDNA clone or validated antibody staining. Finally, the
function of this gene can be inferred through loss-of-function (LoF) analysis,
rescue experiments, overexpression and generating mutant lines with
patient-derived variants. This kind of work can quickly point to mechanisms
of disease, and tissues and structures for successful studies.
5
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2024) 17, dmm050754. doi:10.1242/dmm.050754
Disease Models & Mechanisms
morphological changes can be captured by state-of-the-art imaging
techniques, including MicroCT, light sheet and optical coherence
tomography (Date et al., 2019; Deniz et al., 2017; Macken et al.,
2021; Naert et al., 2021a,b). Detailed image analysis capacity is
being significantly improved by machine-learning algorithms
capable of detecting differences between control and mutant
samples (Naert et al., 2021a,b).
As advanced research elucidates the nature of more rare human
genetic diseases, modelling studies will need to adopt additional
sophisticated methods of phenotyping. Forexample, in response to the
large
number of
neurodevelopmental
disorders
identified
by
diagnostic sequencing and analysis, quantitative behavioural assays
are now being applied to Xenopus disease models. At present, these
include analysis of locomotion and working memory (Ismail et al.,
2022) as well as epilepsy (Panthi et al., 2023), and mainly use
established video-imaging methods and analysis algorithms adapted
for Xenopus (Ismail et al., 2022; Panthi et al., 2023). These assays
have the potential to generate high-throughput data with which to
study neurodevelopmental disorders and test repurposed licenced
medications (see e.g. the target-agnostic drug discovery platform
CogniXense,
https://wyss.harvard.edu/technology/cognixense-for-
rare-disease-drug-discovery/).
Work
of
this
nature
is
being
complemented by the historic strengths of the Xenopus model, e.g.
by using techniques to record neuronal plasticity and action potentials
both within intact tadpoles, and in primary cultures of neuronal cells or
neuronal/muscle co-cultures derived from embryos with gene variants
(Sun and Poo, 1985; Gore et al., 2021; Hiramoto and Cline, 2021).
Rigour
As discussed previously, CRISPR/Cas9-based editing has become a
popular approach for the perturbation of gene function when
modelling
human
genetic
disease
in
Xenopus.
For
these
experiments, the recommended controls vary greatly, from using
non-coding or scrambled sgRNAs to the use of sgRNAs targeting
positive-control genes, like pigmentation genes or disease genes in
other tissues (Willsey et al., 2021). In addition, investigators also
often use multiple sgRNAs targeted to the same gene, as we
recommended above, and test whether the edits induced by
individual sgRNAs phenocopy each other (Willsey et al., 2018b).
The ultimate control, of course, is rescuing the phenotype by
expressing the reference allele (Willsey et al., 2020). This rescue
approach also opens up the huge opportunity to test VUS and/or
missense variants to infer causality of suspected alleles (Blackburn
et al., 2019; Kostiuk and Khokha, 2021). The sequence of the
expression construct can be modified with said variants, and if this
modified allele is not able to rescue the phenotype, like the reference
allele does, this indicates that the missense variant or VUS causes
LOF. The rescue allele is most often cloned into an expression
plasmid to make synthetic mRNA and is then microinjected. Other
vectors include a bacterial artificial chromosome construct (Fish
et al., 2014) or knock-in of the desired template into the genome
(Nakayama et al., 2020), although these strategies can be technically
challenging. Regardless of the rescue allele strategy, a lack of
phenotypic rescue does not necessarily mean that the original
perturbation was off-target or non-specific. There are many reasons
why a rescue experiment may not work, including inadequate gene
dosage, cell-type-specific gene expression or temporal dynamics.
Additional experimental controls include genetic perturbation of
one cell of a 2-cell-stage embryo of generation F0, which allows
within-animal comparisons and controls for inter-animal variation,
especially when the perturbation is coupled with the expression of a
fluorophore for tracing. Phenocopying a LOF perturbation with an
additional technique, such as a pharmacological inhibitor or
expression
of
a
dominant-negative
construct
can
increase
confidence that the observed phenotype is caused by LOF of the
gene in question. Generating a germline mutant line that
recapitulates the F0 phenotype can be very powerful confirmation,
albeit much more time consuming. While more challenging
experimentally, creating a germline benign variant in the gene of
interest that does not produce the phenotype in question can be
powerful evidence that mutagenesis itself did not create the
phenotype. Also, whenever possible, the identity of control and
test animals should be masked to the researcher performing the
phenotyping to prevent bias. Finally, we advise being cautious
when including detailed clinical phenotyping into the design phase
of these experiments, since this can bias findings and may also lead
to overlooking phenotypes in the frog that are either species-specific
or have yet to be identified in the often very small number of human
patients with a particular gene variant.
Xenopus as a diagnostic platform
Whilst the ability to sequence DNA has advanced tremendously, the
ability to interpret variants significantly lags behind. At present,
∼70% of variants captured in the sequencing results of a patient are
VUS, which may be in known or newly identified disease-causing
genes. VUS are usually coding variants that lack sufficient evidence
to determine whether they are pathogenic or benign. Whilst we
briefly mentioned expressing VUS in Xenopus in the previous
section, it is important to emphasise that testing the link between a
VUS and disease is significantly different from the LOF studies
described above. When attempting to model a VUS in a gene that
has not been previously associated with a disease, a simple LOF
strategy as outlined in detail above could be a useful first step,
although LOF models are insufficient to underpin clinical
intervention. However, if a patient-specific VUS is linked to a
known disease-causing gene, only precise models of the variant
have merit. Even when a novel variant is identified in a gene that,
when inactivated, is entirely consistent with the phenotype of a
patient, said variant will still be classified as a VUS and often not
clinically reported unless functionally validated. Therefore, there is
strong demand from genetic disease patients, families and clinicians
for cost-effective and rapid in vivo models to functionally test these
variants and improve diagnostic rates.
Gut dysmotility
Heart defects
Nerve
regeneration
Neural tube
defects
Vision
problems
Kidney disease
Microcephaly
Hydrocephalus
Respiratory
disease
Craniofacial
defects
Fig. 3. Phenotyping opportunities in Xenopus. Studying how genetic
perturbation disrupts organ function is essential to successful human
disease modelling. Various methods are available in Xenopus and, due to
the functional similarities, can be applied to characterising disorders within
organs as diverse as lung, heart, brain, kidney and gut.
6
REVIEW
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2024) 17, dmm050754. doi:10.1242/dmm.050754
Disease Models & Mechanisms
Xenopus provides an excellent model for this scenario, offering
multiple possible approaches. First, the VUS can be recapitulated in
the endogenous Xenopus gene if this is sufficiently conserved.
Whilst this is straightforward for LOF frameshift, deletion, exon
skipping and nonsense mutations, single-base changes, however,
are more of a challenge and require the improvement of base-editing
techniques in the frog (Shi et al., 2019; Park et al., 2017; Naert et al.,
2021a,b). Heterozygous, non-mosaic, precise changes, including
small insertions, have been achieved by engineering the oocyte
genome (Aslan et al., 2017; Martin, 2023) or by injecting long
single-stranded DNA templates for insertion into the frog genome
via endogenous homology-directed repair (Nakayama et al., 2020,
2022c).These methodologies remain inefficient yet worthwhile.
An alternative approach that mitigates the inefficiencies of
engineering precise gene edits is to first disrupt the endogenous
Xenopus gene and then attempt to rescue its expression, as we
discussed above. This can be achieved using a human cDNA
expression construct that either carries the reference sequence or one
with the VUS (Devotta et al., 2016; Griffin et al., 2018). If the
reference sequence can rescue the phenotype but the VUS cannot,
that provides excellent evidence that the VUS is deleterious to
protein function. The largest issue with this approach is that, in some
cases, the human reference sequence cannot rescue the frog
phenotype for a variety of possible reasons, including dose, failure
to interact properly with Xenopus proteins and cell type specificity
(discussed by Rana et al., 2006). Alternatively, if the VUS but not the
reference allele produces a LOF phenotype, this can be evidence of a
dominant-negative mechanism of genetic perturbation. Finally, but
perhaps less convincingly, overexpression of the reference sequence
can be used to determine the GoF outcome and then this phenotype
can be compared with that produced by expression of variants.
In terms of controls for diagnostic work, if the VUS in frog
recapitulates the phenotype of the patient, then this already shows
the result is consistent in two different species. Coupled with a
second experiment that confirms the phenotype in a biochemical or
cellular assay, two species sharing a VUS-phenotype link is strong
evidence for specificity and relevance in experiments testing the
link between a genetic variant and disease. Of course, there is also
the potential for the frog to incompletely recapitulate the human
presentation due to evolutionary differences. In this case, a
complementary model, perhaps human iPSCs or a mammalian
model, can be useful to fill in those gaps.
In addition to VUS classifications, Xenopus is an excellent
platform for modelling diseases with known causal genetic variants
but unknown molecular mechanisms of disease (Mascibroda et al.,
2022; Wong et al., 2023; Marquez et al., 2021; Colleluori and
Khokha, 2023; Sempou et al., 2022; Willsey et al., 2021; Rosenthal
et al., 2021; Grand et al., 2023; Getwan et al., 2021; Kulkarni and
Khokha, 2018; Boskovski et al., 2013). In this case, specific variants
can be studied, and molecular mechanisms identified in vivo. As
many disease-causing variants are missense and, potentially, not
simply LOF, Xenopus is extremely valuable because it is cost-
effective and simple to create many germline mutant lines to mimic
such variants in their native locus, as long as the locus is well-
conserved between humans and frogs. Such work identifying new
disease mechanisms can open the door to biomarker and therapeutic
development.
Working with clinicians and ethical considerations
When attempting to model VUS and potential new disease gene(s),
there are clear benefits to having direct contact with the primary
referring clinician or bioinformatician. Through direct collaborations
with physicians and clinical geneticists, researchers can ascertain the
variant-calling methodology and the confidence in the in silico
predictions of pathogenicity for each variant (Seaby and Ennis,
2020). One challenge associated with this collaboration is that
patient genetic and phenotypic data are subject to extensive
protections to ensure privacy. Whilst medical privacy regulations
vary between countries, most databases generally restrict access to
data that may potentially identify the patient. For example, when
mining rare disease data from the Genomics England database, it is
not possible to export any human phenotype ontology (HPO) terms
(Robinson et al., 2008) or a combination of HPO terms that occurs in
fewer than five individuals, regardless of genotype data. In the USA,
access to clinical data for research purposes often requires
Institutional Review Board approval and a data transfer agreement.
Such restrictions, even for de-identified and/or fully anonymised
data, frequently vary between repositories (Table 1) and researchers
need to learn to navigate them prior to planning to model the variants
in Xenopus and other organisms.
An additional consideration is that there are significant differences
in the way that Xenopus researchers and clinical geneticists describe
changes to the genome. A small, but crucial difference that has
reduced cross-disciplinary fluency in the past is that clinical or
human geneticists consider the first nucleotide of the translation start
codon in the reference sequence as nucleotide 1 of a coding DNA
(den Dunnen et al., 2016), while animal researchers normally use the
start of the transcript in the annotated genome as nucleotide 1.
Similarly, many datasets and clinical reports do not include
information on the zygosity of the variant. The short but excellent
guide on how variants are annotated in human genetics is thus
essential reading (Ogino et al., 2007). Less of a systematic challenge
is that the workload of clinicians may not give them time to record
the complete phenotypic information about a patient. For this reason,
it is often desirable to work with clinicians who are based locally to
the model organism laboratory and, ideally, with whose team
researchers have close and regular collaboration. This allows
researchers to follow up on specific, additional phenotypes that
may present in the model but have not been recorded in the patient
reports. Comprehensive phenotyping information is often very
difficult to find in publicly accessible databases. By working closely
with bioinformaticians and clinical geneticists, Xenopus researchers
can not only enhance both their own understanding of the
phenotypes and genotypes associated with each disease, but can
also have rapid and powerful impact by testing genotype-phenotype
links and helping clinicians support their patients and their families.
Accessing information through regulatory bodies and patient
advocacy groups is an important approach, but involves a
significant investment to ensure ethics and informed consent are
considered properly. However, including these organisations is
valuable since they offer opportunities to access patient registries,
tissue biobanks and global collaborations, which improves the depth
of data available. In particular, these groups often facilitate contacts
with those working in different models, whether cells, organoids or
other animals. It is increasingly recognised that multi-species
comparisons are important for improving our understanding of
gene-phenotype relationships and the key molecular findings linked
to the perturbation of gene function in the context of human disease
modelling and beyond.
To mitigate and anticipate the above issues in data sharing, patient
consent, and ethics, the community is developing new data-sharing
models. A prime example is the Centers for Mendelian Genomics
(CMG) in the USA, now governed by the GREGoR Consortium
